Abstract

In order to assess the effects of juice feedings during acute diarrhea a
double-blind, randomized study was performed in 90 children, mean age of
10 ± 4.28 months. Thirty patients with acute diarrhea were fed
twice-daily 15 ml/kg of Apple Juice (AJ), 30 received White Grape Juice
(WGJ), and 30 were given colored and flavored water (WA) as part of
their age appropriate dietary intake. The duration and severity of
diarrhea were the main endpoint variables of the study performed in a
metabolic unit. The patients were similar among the 3 groups, had
diarrhea for 50--64 hours prior to admission, and were dehydrated when
admitted to the unit for study. Half of the patients in each group were
well nourished and the others had mild to moderate degrees of
malnutrition. Rotavirus infection was the agent causing the illness in
63% of the patients. The infants fed juice ingested 14--17% more
calories than those given WA, (those receiving AJ and WGJ ingested 95
and 98 Calories/Kg/d respectively) whereas those receiving WA consumed
81 cal/kg/d). The increased energy intake was not at the expense of
other foods or milk formula. The mean body weight gain was greater among
patients receiving WGJ (+ 50.7 gm) as compared with the patients in the
AJ group (+ 18.3 gm) or the patients fed WA (- 0.7 gm) (p = 0.08). The
duration of the illness was longer in the infants fed juice as compared
with those given WA (p = 0.006), the mean +/- SD duration in hours was
49.4 ± 32.6, 47.5 ± 38.9 and 26.5 ± 27.4 in patients fed AJ, WGJ and WA
respectively. All patients improved while ingesting juice and none of
them developed persistent diarrhea; most recovered within 50 hours of
the beginning of treatment and less than one fourth had diarrhea longer
than 96 hours in the unit. The fecal losses were also increased among
the juice fed patients (p = 0.001); the mean ± SD fecal excretion in
g/kg/h was 3.94 ± 2.35, 3.59 ± 2.35, and 2.19 ± 1.63 in AJ, WGJ and WA
respectively. The stool output was highest during the first day of
treatment among all the patients, though those fed AJ had the highest
volume of fecal losses and those who received WA had the lowest stool
excretion. After the first day of treatment the differences in fecal
excretion were not significant. The ability to tolerate carbohydrates
during the illness and immediately after recovery was similar among the
3 groups of patients. Intake of juices with different fructose/glucose
ratios and osmolarities resulted in more fecal losses and more prolonged
diarrhea as compared with water feedings, but the patients given juice
ingested more calories and gained more weight, particularly among those
being fed the juice with equimolar concentrations of fructose and
glucose.

# Results

The clinical characteristics and the laboratory data of the patients on
admission are shown in tables [2](#) and [3](#). The patients in each of
the 3 groups were similar in age, duration and severity of diarrhea,
presence of fever and vomiting. Also there were no differences in the
proportion of patients who received breast feedings or in their
nutritional status. Over 46% of patients studied in each group, were
well nourished, more than 33% showed mild body weight deficits (\<1 SD)
and the others had mild to moderate malnutrition (\>2 SD). All patients
presented some dehydration (mild to moderate), and required no
intravenous hydration therapy. Differences in clinical characteristics
were not significant among groups.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Clinical Characteristics of Patients on Admission
:::

                                 Apple Juice n = 30   White Grape Juice n = 30   Water\* n= 30                    
  ------------------------------ -------------------- -------------------------- --------------- ------- -------- --------
                                                                                                                  
                                 χ                    *SD*                       χ               *SD*    χ        SD
  Age (months)                   10.27                4.75                       10.27           4.14    11.09    4.00
  Diarrhea Duration (hr)         56.37                33.90                      64.17           38.95   53.47    33.35
  Fever Duration (hr)            37.77                33.46                      47.11           49.62   41.04    38.11
  Vomiting (h)                   41.57                35.45                      46.97           39.54   44.33    31.44
  Breastfeeding                  13 (n)               43.3%                      16 (n)          53.3%   09 (n)   30.0 %
  Well Nourished                 16 (n)               53.3%                      15 (n)          50.0%   14 (n)   46.6%
  Nutritional Risk\*\*           08(n)                26.6%                      10(n)           33.3%   15(n)    50.0%
  Mild Malnutrition              03 (n)               10.0%                      05(n)           16.6%   01(n)    3.4%
  Moderate/Severe Malnutrition   03(n)                10.0%                      00(n)           0.0%    00(n)    0.0%

There were no statistically significant differences among groups,
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) p \> 0.05. Fever was considered above 37.5
C temperature. Nutritional risk indicated body weight deficit \< 1 SD,
Mild malnutrition \< 2 SD and Moderate/Severe Malnutrition \> 2 SD.

n = number of patients and % of patients in each category.

\*Colored/flavored to resemble juice
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Laboratory Data of Patients on Admission\*
:::

                            Apple Juice n = 30   White Grape Juice n = 30   Water^\*^ n = 30                     
  ------------------------- -------------------- -------------------------- ------------------ -------- -------- --------
                                                                                                                 
                            χ                    *SD*                       χ                  *SD*     χ        *SD*
  Serum Sodium (mEq/l)      142.03               5.45                       140.96             3.51     140.51   5.39
  Serum Potassium (mEq/l)   3.99                 0.59                       3.95               0.81     4.27     0.78
  Hematocrit (%)            31.17                3.29                       30.93              2.50     32.03    3.55
  Hemoglobin (g/dl)         10.28                1.13                       10.24              0.87     10.58    1.19
  No Anemia                 06(n)                20.0 %                     02(n)              6.7 %    07(n)    23.3 %
  Mild Anemia †             20(n)                66.7 %                     26(n)              86.6%    20(n)    66.7 %
  Severe Anemia†            04(n)                13.3 %                     02(n)              6.7 %    03(n)    10.0 %
                                                                                                                 
  Rotavirus                 19(n)                63.3 %                     18(n)              60.0 %   18(n)    60.0 %
  Parasites‡                05(n)                16.7%.                     04(n)              13.3 %   01(n)    3.3 %

\*There were no significant differences among groups by ANOVA p \> 0.05.

† The criteria for mild Anemia was a hemoglobin less than 11.0 g/dl and
for severe anemia was a hemoglobin less than 9 g/dl (WHO, 1989)

‡ The parasites detected were: Ascaris lumbricoides (4), Giardia lamblia
(1) Blastocytes hominis (1) Entamoeba coli (1) and Cryptosporidium
parvum (3).

n = number of patients and % of patients in each category

^x^Coloured/flavoured to resemble juice
::::

The serum electrolyte levels on admission to the hospital were similar
among the 3 groups of patients (Table [3](#)). The hemoglobin (Hb) and
hematocrit levels were also similar among groups, but two thirds of the
patients exhibited mild degrees of anemia (Hb \< 11 g), and in 9 infants
there was a more severe degree (Hb \< 9 g). In all instances iron
supplementation was prescribed at the completion of the study. Rotavirus
was identified in the stools of 55 of the patients, in 4 there was a
pathogenic Escherichia Coli, in 10 there were parasites detected, and in
the remaining 21 infants there were no stool pathogens identified.

The daily intake of the patients while in the study is shown in table
[4](#). The amount of water, milk formula, and breast milk feedings did
not differ among the groups. However, the infants given WGJ readily
consumed more juice than those fed AJ or WA. The total energy intake was
higher in the juice fed groups as compared with the WA one. The WGJ
patients ingested an average of 17% more calories on a daily basis, and
the AJ infants consumed a mean of 14% more than the WA group. The
increased energy intake was not at the expense of the other foods; both
milk formula and complementary foods were ingested in similar quantities
among the 3 groups of patients. The mean body weight gain was also
higher among the juice fed patients; there was a mean weight gain of
18.3 gm in the AJ fed patients and of 50.6 gm in those given WGJ,
whereas there was a mean loss of body weight (- 7.0 gm) among the WA
group patients (p = 0.08).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Daily intake of patients throughout the study (Kcal/Kg/day)
:::

                        Apple Juice n = 30   White Grape Juice n = 30   Water^\*^ n = 30   P value                      
  --------------------- -------------------- -------------------------- ------------------ --------- ---------- ------- ---------------
                                                                                                                        
                        χ                    *SD*                       χ                  *SD*      χ          *SD*    
  Total Calories        95.84                22.42                      98.65              30.52     81.43      23.09   0.02\*
  Milk Formula          54.49                23.43                      50.21              34.57     52.68      17.93   0.81
  Breast Milk           08.71                11.57                      15.80              18.56     05.45      10.96   0.06
  Water                 30.67                9.25                       30.27              09.57     26.98      9.37    0.25
  ORS                   45.52                31.17                      39.12              25.10     25.10      17.91   0.01\*\*
  \"Juices\"            18.61                3.93                       20.98              5.35      17.32^x^   4.37    0.01\*\*\*
  Total Liquids         157.90               38.26                      158.42             50.35     127.70     28.25   0.001\*\*\*\*
  Complementary Foods   23.90                11.61                      25.12              13.97     26.92      11.59   0.64

\* Significant differences for Juice Groups vs Water, by ANOVA
(Bonferroni)

\*\* Significant differences for Water vs both juice groups

\*\*\* Significant differences for WGJ vs each other group

\*\*\*\* Significant Differences for Water vs each other group

^x^ Colored flavored water to resemble juice

Data are means +/- SD
::::

The duration of diarrhea differed among the 3 groups of patients (Table
[5](#)). The total duration of diarrhea from the start of the illness
through their recovery was decreased among the WA fed patients as
compared with the AJ and WGJ: groups 111.7 ± 48.2, 105.4 ± 44.9 and 80.0
± 39.6 hours in AJ, WGJ and WA respectively. The differences in the
duration of diarrhea were more marked while being treated in the
hospital, the illness being shorter among patients given water instead
of juice. However the majority of the patients recovered promptly
regardless of the treatment given (Figure [1](#)). Most of the patients
improved within 50 hours after treatment was instituted, less than one
forth of them had diarrhea persisting more than 96 hours and no one had
it for more than 7 days.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Duration of diarrhea in hours after randomization. Duration of diarrhea
:::

                      Mean   SD
  ------------------- ------ ------
  Apple Juice         49.4   32.6
  White Grape Juice   47.5   38.9
  Water \*            26.5   27.4

\*Significant differences detect by Kruskal-Wallis p \< 0.05. Water vs
Juice groups. Data are hours +/- SD

Water coloured and flavored to resemble juice.
::::

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Survival analysis of total of diarrhea – Kaplan-Meier, per
group. * Statistic difference were found, p &lt; 0,05, among water group
and apple juice (P = 0,03) or white grape juice (P = 0,00).</figcaption>
</figure>

The severity of diarrhea also differed among the treatment groups (Table
[6](#)). The stool output among the WA group of patients was
significantly decreased as compared with those fed juice. During the
first day of treatment those fed water had a mean stool output of 40%
less than those fed juice. With improvement the differences among the
treatments were minimized, and were no longer significant after the
2^nd^ day of the illness. There were also significant differences in the
severity of diarrhea among AJ and WGJ feedings (Table [6](#)). During
the first 24 hours of treatment of the illness the patients receiving AJ
had more marked stool losses than those fed WGJ. The mean excretion of
stools was 21% higher in AJ fed patients than in the WGJ fed group.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Fecal losses throughout the study and on the first day after
randomization
:::

                      **Total Losses (g/kg/hr)**   **First Day Losses g/kg/hr**                
  ------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------------ ------------ ------
                      Mean                         SD                             Mean         SD
                                                                                               
  Apple Juice         3.94                         2.35                           4.13\*\*     2.90
  White Grape Juice   3.59                         2.35                           3.28\*\*     2.39
  Water^x^            2.19\*                       1.63                           1.78\*\*\*   1.80

\*Differences Among groups Water vs each of the juice groups
(Kruskal-Wallis test) (p = 0.001)

\*\* Differences between WGJ and AJ (p = 0.02)

\*\*\* Differences between Water and each of the juice groups (p =
0.001)

^x^Coloured/flavoured to resemble juice
::::

The stool excretion data were treated for possible confounding and
co-variables which could play a role in determining the final results.
The covariance analysis and the robust regression showed a possible
influence of ORS intake in the differences detected among the 3 groups
of patients. The stool output was not different when the ORS intake was
adjusted for the 3 groups of patients and the urinary outputs were also
similar. Vomitus losses were not different among the 3 groups of
patients, vomiting being present primarily during the first 24 hrs. of
treatment.

There were 2 patients who had severe diarrhea during the treatment
period (\>10 ml/kg/hr). These patients were in the AJ group, one of
these patients had acid stools and none had carbohydrates in feces.
These 2 patients were treated with a lactose free formula, with
improvement in stool output. There were three other patients who showed
carbohydrate intolerance with acid stools or sugars in feces among the 3
groups, they improved without any dietary modifications.

Vomiting was present in all groups of patients: 22 (AJ), 26 (WGJ), and
19 (WA) during the first day of treatment; nevertheless this did not
represented a limitation for Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT) or feeding
regimen and no patient was withdrawn or shifted to another therapy due
to vomiting.

The response to juice feedings, as determined by breath hydrogen
excretion after improvement of the illness, was not different among the
3 groups of patients. Most infants did not show breath hydrogen
excretion levels above 20 ppm; and there were 17, 16 and 10 patients
among the AJ, WGJ and WA groups respectively, who failed to show BH2
levels above 5 ppm at any time. Only 18 patients demonstrated a delta
BH2 level increase above the basal value of more than 20 ppm. Eight of
them were given AJ, 6 were fed WGJ and 4 received WA. There were 11, 16,
and 13 patients in each group who exhibited a BH2 value above 20 ppm
independent of the delta differences from basal among the WGJ, AJ and WA
fed groups respectively. The differences in BH2 levels among groups were
not significant.
