Abstract

## OBJECTIVE

Moderate alcohol consumption is associated with reduced incidence of
type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular mortality and increases adiponectin
concentrations, but effects might differ according to sex and beverage
consumed.

## RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS

A total of 72 healthy individuals (22--56 years) were enrolled in this
randomized controlled crossover trial. After washout, two interventions
for 3 weeks followed: ethanol (concentration 12.5%), beer (5.6%), or red
wine (12.5%) equivalent to 30 g ethanol/day for men and 20 g/day for
women or the same de-alcoholized beverages or water. Adiponectin was
measured by sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

## RESULTS

Among women, adiponectin significantly increased after consuming red
wine (29.8%, *P* \< 0.05) and increased among men after ethanol solution
(17.4%, *P* \< 0.05) and consuming beer (16.1%, *P* \< 0.05).
De-alcoholized beverages had no substantial effect on adiponectin
concentrations.

## CONCLUSIONS

Moderate amounts of ethanol-containing beverages increased adiponectin
concentrations, but sex-specific effects might depend on type of
beverage consumed.

# RESULTS

Compliance was excellent according to self-report and counting of empty
bottles returned. One participant was excluded because of protocol
violation. Baseline characteristics including age, BMI, and liver
enzymes did not differ within sexes and between intervention groups.
Adiponectin concentrations were substantially higher among females
(means 7.6--8.8 μg/ml) than males (means 4.8--6.3 μg/ml) but also did
not differ between the intervention groups within each sex. Among
females, adiponectin significantly increased after intervention with red
wine (29.8%, *P* \< 0.05) and increased among men after ethanol solution
(17.4%, *P* \< 0.05) and beer consumption (16.1%, *P* \< 0.04).
De-alcoholized beverages had no substantial effect on adiponectin
concentrations ([Fig. 1](#)).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Mean percent change with standard deviation of adiponectin
concentrations from baseline after intervention with beer (B+),
de-alcoholized beer (B−), red wine (RW+), de-alcoholized red wine (RW−),
enthanol solution (EtOH), and water (W) (*<em>P</em> &lt;
0.05).</figcaption>
</figure>
