Abstract

## OBJECTIVES:

To evaluate the importance of providing guidelines to patients via
active telephone calls for blood pressure control and for preventing the
discontinuation of treatment among hypertensive patients.

## INTRODUCTION:

Many reasons exist for non-adherence to medical regimens, and one of the
strategies employed to improve treatment compliance is the use of active
telephone calls.

## METHODS:

Hypertensive patients (n = 354) who could receive telephone calls to
remind them of their medical appointments and receive instruction about
hypertension were distributed into two groups: a) "uncomplicated" --
hypertensive patients with no other concurrent diseases and b)
"complicated" - severe hypertensive patients (mean diastolic ≥110 mmHg
with or without medication) or patients with comorbidities. All
patients, except those excluded (n = 44), were open-block randomized to
follow two treatment regimens ("traditional" or "current") and to
receive or not receive telephone calls ("phone calls" and "no phone
calls" groups, respectively).

## RESULTS:

Significantly fewer patients in the "phone calls" group discontinued
treatment compared to those in the "no phone calls" group (4 vs. 30;
p\<0.0094). There was no difference in the percentage of patients with
controlled blood pressure in the "phone calls" group and "no phone
calls" group or in the "traditional" and "current" groups. The
percentage of patients with controlled blood pressure (\<140/90 mmHg)
was increased at the end of the treatment (74%), reaching 80% in the
"uncomplicated" group and 67% in the "complicated" group (p\<0.000001).

## CONCLUSION:

Guidance to patients via active telephone calls is an efficient strategy
for preventing the discontinuation of antihypertensive treatment.

# RESULTS

The study included 398 patients. Of those, 44 were excluded for the
following reasons: a) lack of enrollment in the Biosintética Assistance
program (n = 17); b) body mass index \>40 kg/m^2^ (n = 6); c) secondary
hypertension (n = 4); d) white-coat hypertension (n = 3); e) white-coat
normotension ("masked hypertension") (n = 3); f) alcohol use (n = 2); g)
classification error (n = 4); h) refusal to do ABPM (n = 2); i) loss of
blood pressure measurements from the first visit (n = 1); j) pregnancy
(n = 1); k) death (n = 1). A total of 354 patients were evaluated.

There were no statistically significant differences in age, gender, skin
color, body mass index, blood pressure or heart rate between the groups
classified as: "complicated" (n = 175) and "uncomplicated" (n = 179);
"traditional" (n = 176) and "current" (n = 178); "phone calls" (n = 108)
and "no phone calls" (n = 246) ([Table 1](#)). In addition, no
differences were seen in marital status, education or occupation.

## a) Control of Blood Pressure

A marked reduction in blood pressure was seen in patients from both the
"complicated" and "uncomplicated" groups ([Table 2](#)). The blood
pressure was reduced by 19±10/20±14 mmHg in the "uncomplicated" group
and by 18±14/22±17 mmHg (systolic/diastolic) in the "complicated" group
(p\>0.05; n = 354).

The "phone calls" and "no phone calls" groups showed significantly lower
blood pressures at the end of treatment (p\< 0.00001). The "traditional"
and "current" groups showed significantly lower blood pressures at the
end of treatment ([Figure 1](#)).

The percentage of patients with controlled blood pressure
(\<140/90 mmHg) was also high at the end of treatment (74%). On the
other hand, the percentage of patients with blood pressure reduced to
\<120/80 mmHg was only 29%. There was no difference in the percentage of
patients with controlled blood pressure between the "phone calls" and
"no phone calls" groups or in the reduction of blood pressure and the
percentage of patients with controlled blood pressure among the
"traditional" and "current" treatments. However, patients in the "phone
calls" group (80%) had better blood pressure control than those in the
"no phone calls" group (71%), though the difference was not
statistically significant. The "uncomplicated" and "complicated" groups
had statistically significant differences in the percentage of patients
with controlled blood pressure (\<140/90 mmHg) (80% vs. 67%,
respectively; p\<0.000001). At the next to last study visit (visit 7),
90% and 66% of patients had blood pressure measurements \<140/90 mmHg in
the "uncomplicated" and "complicated" groups, respectively. However,
there was no difference in the percentage of patients with blood
pressure \<120/80 mmHg (31% on the final visit in both groups, [Table
3](#)).

Among patients with a blood pressure \<140/90 mmHg at the final visit,
only 3% had received only one type of antihypertensive medication; most
patients (56%) received 2 (34%) or 3 (22%) types of antihypertensive
medication ([Table 4](#)).

## b) Treatment Discontinuation

A significantly lower number of patients in the "phone calls" group quit
the treatment compared to the "no phone calls" group (4 vs. 30,
respectively; [Figure 2](#)). There was no difference in the percentage
discontinuation in the "complicated" and "uncomplicated" groups or in
the "current" and "traditional" treatment regimens (p\>0.05).

## c) Tablet Count

Patients in the groups: "complicated" and "uncomplicated"; "traditional"
and "current"; "phone calls" and "no phone calls" did not show
statistically significant differences in medication intake, as verified
by counting the tablets returned at the visits. Compliance was over 85%
at all visits. However, patients in the current + uncomplicated + phone
call group had the highest rate of compliance (93%). The lowest rate of
compliance occurred in the traditional + uncomplicated + no phone call
group (85%) (p\>0.05).

## d) Body Weight

Blood pressure reductions occurred in the presence of increased body
weight (baseline visit: 73±14 kg; final visit: 74±14 kg, p = 0.0008,
[Table 5](#)).

## e) Adverse Events and Laboratory Tests

Most of the adverse events that occurred during the study were of light
or moderate intensity. Patients in the "traditional" group showed
significantly more depression symptoms (5 vs. 0) and coughing (30 vs. 4)
when compared with patients in the "current" treatment group. On the
other hand, patients in the "current" group had a greater number of
complaints of dizziness when compared to patients in the "traditional"
treatment group (63 vs. 42, respectively).

Compared to patients in the "uncomplicated" group, patients in the
"complicated" group presented a larger number the following symptoms:
abdominal pain (19 vs. 8), sleepiness (32 vs. 10), cough (23 vs. 11),
weakness (23 vs. 11) and blurred vision (6 vs. 0). Conversely, compared
to patients in the "complicated" group, patients in the "uncomplicated"
group presented a larger number of complaints such as pain (74 vs. 53)
and headache (80 vs. 59). Patients in the "phone calls" group reported a
34% rate of symptoms, while a 66% rate of symptoms was reported by
patients in the "no phone calls" group. The most frequently (\>10%)
found adverse events were as follows: headache (62.1%), unspecific pain
(58.2%), dizziness (45.8%), edema (40.1%), fatigue (15.3%), sleepiness
(14.4%), cough (13.3%), precordial pain (13.3%), weakness (11.9%),
tachycardia (11.3%), insomnia (10.5%) and paresthesia (10.5%). There
were 26 (8%) severe adverse events: death (5), unstable angina (4),
acute myocardial infarction (1), transient ischemic attack (1),
hypertensive encephalopathy (1), breast cancer (3), bronchospastic
crisis (1), cholecystopathy (1), diabetic decompensation (1), syncope
(1), nephrectomy (2), trauma (2), peritoneal bypass (1), diarrhea (1)
and gastrectomy (1).

The results of the laboratory tests performed in the beginning and end
of the study are shown in [Table 6](#). There was an increase in the
24-hour urinary sodium excretion from the beginning to the end of the
study (120±46 vs. 129±45 mEq/L, respectively; p = 0.000036)

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Study groups demographics.
:::

                                           Uncomplicated n = 179   Complicated n = 175   Traditional n = 176   Current n = 178   No Phone Calls n = 246   Phone Calls n = 108
  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ----------------- ------------------------ ---------------------
  Age (years)                              53±11                   53±11                 54±11                 52±11             54±11                    52±11
  Gender (%)                                                                                                                                              
  Male                                     27                      41                    33                    34                33                       34
  Female                                   73                      59                    67                    66                67                       66
  Skin color (%)                                                                                                                                          
  Whites                                   62                      52                    60                    54                56                       60
  Non-whites                               38                      48                    40                    46                44                       40
  BMI (kg/m^2^)                            29±4                    29±4                  29±4                  29±4              29±4                     29±4
  Blood Pressure at Randomization (mmHg)                                                                                                                  
  Systolic                                 155±12                  163±24                159±19                158±19            159±19                   158±19
  Diastolic                                91±10                   102±20                96±17                 97±16             97±16                    97±17
  Heart rate                               80±13                   83±13                 81±13                 82±13             82±13                    82±13

Data are shown as mean±s.d.; BMI = Body Mass Index; p\>0.05:
"complicated" vs. "uncomplicated", "traditional" vs. "current", "phone
calls" vs. "no phone calls" for age, gender, skin color and BMI.

Blood pressure at randomization: uncomplicated vs. complicated groups:
systolic -- t  =  3.78, p = 0.0002; diastolic -- t  =  6.44,
p\<0.000001; FC -- t  =  2.41, p = 0.016
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Blood pressure (mmHg) at the beginning and end of the 12-month treatment
in the "uncomplicated" and "complicated" groups, according to the
"traditional" and "current" treatments and randomization into the "phone
calls" and "no phone calls" groups.
:::

  Group                              Randomization Visit   Final Visit
  ---------------------------------- --------------------- ------------------
  Uncomplicated (n = 179)            155±12/91±10          126±14\*/73±11\*
  "Traditional" Treatment (n = 90)   155±12/91±9           126±14\*/71±11\*
  "Current" Treatment (n = 89)       155±12/92±10          126±15\*/74±11\*
  "No Phone Calls" (n = 119)         156±13/91±10          127±16\*/73±12\*
  "Phone Calls" (n = 60)             154±11/92±9           125±11\*/73±10\*
  Complicated (n = 175)              163±24/102±20         131±19\*/78±14\*
  "Traditional" Treatment (n = 86)   164±24/102±21         132±21\*/77±16\*
  "Current" Treatment (n = 89)       161±23/102±19         130±18\*/78±12\*
  "No Phone Calls" (n = 127)         162±23/102±19         132±20\*/79±15\*
  "Phone Calls" (n = 48)             163±25/103±22         127±18\*/75±11\*

Data are shown as mean±s.d.; \*p\< 0.00001 -- Randomization Visit versus
Final Visit.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Percentage of patients with controlled blood pressure at the beginning
(randomization visit), at the next-to-last visit (visit 7) and at the
end (visit 8-final) of the 12-month treatment period.
:::

  Group                     Randomization Visit   Visit 7   Final Visit
  ------------------------- --------------------- --------- -------------
  "Uncomplicated"           0\*/0\*\*             90\*/31   80/30
  "Complicated"             16/6                  66/31     67/28
  "Traditional" Treatment   8/3                   75/32     73/31
  "Current" Treatment       11/3                  81/30     74/27
  "Phone Calls"             8/3                   84/32     80/33
  "No Phone Calls"          8/3                   75/30     71/27
  Total                     8/3                   78/31     74/29

Controlled blood pressure: \< 140/90 mmHg/120/80 mmHg.

p \>0.05, except:

1.  \*Uncomplicated versus complicated: Randomization visit - χ^2^~1~
     =  28.94; p\<0.000001 (SBP\<140/DBP\<90)

2.  \*\*Uncomplicated versus complicated: Randomization visit - χ^2^~1~
     =  8.55; p = 0.0035 (SBP\<120/DBP\<80)

3.  Uncomplicated versus complicated: Visit 7 - χ^2^~1~  =  28.84;
    p\<0.000001 (SBP\<140/DBP\<90)
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Number of antihypertensive medications in use at the end of the study in
patients who achieved control (\<140/90 mmHg) of their blood pressure at
the end of the 12-month study.
:::

  Number of Antihypertensive Medications   Blood Pressure \<140/90 mmHg   Blood Pressure \>140/90 mmHg   Total
  ---------------------------------------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------ -------
  01                                       3.2%                           1.0%                           4.2%
  02                                       34.4%                          5.0%                           39.4%
  03                                       21.9%                          6.8%                           28.7%
  04                                       12.2%                          6.8%                           19.0%
  05                                       3.9%                           2.9%                           6.8%
  06                                       1.6%                           0.3%                           1.9%
  Total                                    77.2%                          22.8%                          100%
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Weight (kg) at the beginning and end of the treatment.
:::

  Group                     Randomization Visit   Final Visit   P Value
  ------------------------- --------------------- ------------- ---------
  "Uncomplicated"           72±12                 73±13         0.39
  "Complicated"             74±15                 76±15         0.007
  "Traditional" Treatment   74±15                 74±15         0.09
  "Current" Treatment       73±13                 74±13         0.005
  "Phone Calls"             74±14                 74±15         0.13
  "No Phone Calls"          73±14                 74±14         0.018
  Total                     73±14                 74±14         0.0008

Data are shown as mean±s.d.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Results of laboratory tests measured at the beginning and end of the
study.
:::

                                             Initial      Final        Test value   P value
  ------------------------------------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ -------------
  Fasting Glucose (mg/dL)                    108±41       111±41       1.82         \>0.05
  Urea (mg/dL)                               32±10        34±16        3.83          = 0.00015
  Creatinine (mg/dl)                         0.9±0.3      1.0±0.4      5.52         \<0.000001
  Total Cholesterol (mg/dL)                  199±44       190±38       5.07          = 0.000001
  HDL Cholesterol (mg/dL)                    49±13        48±14        1.19         \>0.05
  Triglycerides (mg/dL)                      147±123      152±218      0.61         \>0.05
  Uric Acid (mg/dL)                          5.1±1.5      5.3±1.8      3.90          = 0.00011
  Sodium (mEq/L)                             140±3.2      139±2.7      7.34         \<0.000001
  Potassium (mEq/L)                          4.2±0.5      4.2±0.4      1.21         \>0.05
  Hemoglobin (g/dL)                          14.4±1.4     14.2±1.3     4.73          = 0.000003
  Alkaline Phosphatase (U/L)                 79.7±25.3    75.1±22.7    5.29         \<0.000001
  ALT (U/L)                                  23.5±10.6    26.6±51.0    1.15         \>0.05
  AST (U/L)                                  24.4±15.9    30.2±92.5    1.18         \>0.05
  Sodium Urinary Excretion in 24 h (mEq/L)   119.6±45.6   128.8±45.3   12.81         = 0.000036

Data are shown as mean±s.d.
::::
