Abstract

## Objective

Internet-delivered interventions can effectively change health risk
behaviors and their determinants, but adherence to intervention websites
once they are accessed is very low. This study tests whether and how
social presence elements can increase website use.

## Methods

A website about Hepatitis A, B, and C virus infections was used in a
preparatory lab-based eye-tracking study assessing whether social
presence elements attract participants\' attention, because this is a
prerequisite for affecting website use. In the following field study,
482 participants representative of the Dutch population were randomized
to either a website with or a website without social presence elements.
Participants completed a questionnaire of validated measures regarding
user perceptions immediately after exposure to the website. Server
registrations were used to assess website use.

## Results

Participants in the experimental condition focused on the social
presence elements, both in terms of frequency (*F*(1, 98) = 40.34,
*p*\<.001) and duration (*F*(1, 88) = 39.99, *p*\<.001), but did not
differ in website use in comparison with the control condition; neither
in terms of the number of pages visited (*t*(456) = 1.44, *p* = .15),
nor in terms of time on the website (*t*(456) = 0.01, *p* = .99).

## Conclusions

Adding social presence elements did not affect actual use of an
intervention website within a public health context. Possible reasons
are limited attention for these elements in comparison with the main
text and the utilitarian value of intervention websites.

# Results

## Participants

Of those 982 potential participants that were invited, 458 participated
in the study (47%). Half of the participants were female and the mean
age of participants was 49 years (*SD* = 16). Of the participants, 30%
had a low level of highest completed education (equivalent to primary
school/junior high school), 38% an intermediate level (equivalent to
senior high school/junior college), and 32% a high level (equivalent to
college/university). Those 458 that participated were invited to
complete the follow-up measure and 402 of them did so (88%). There was
no selective dropout regarding gender (χ2 (1, N = 458) = 0.3,
*p* = .57), level of education (χ2 = 5.0, *p* = .08), or Hepatitis
knowledge at baseline (*t*(456) = 1.83, *p* = .07). Furthermore, dropout
did not differ between the two conditions (χ2 (1, N = 458) = 3.2,
*p* = .08). Those who dropped out, however, were younger (*M* = 43 vs 50
years, (*t*(456) = 3.19, *p* = .002).

## Manipulation check

Participants in the experimental condition scored higher on perceived
social presence than the control condition (*M* = 4.9 vs. 4.4,
*t*(456) = 4.11, *p*\<.001, Cohen\'s d = 0.38), which indicates that the
manipulation did succeed. This effect can be classified as small.

## Website use and Hepatitis knowledge

Participants in the experimental condition did not differ in website use
in comparison with the control condition; neither in terms of the number
of pages visited, nor in terms of time on the website ([Table 1](#)).
Effect sizes were trivial. Thus, there is no support for Hypothesis 1.
The increase in Hepatitis knowledge between pre-test and post-test did
not differ between both conditions (*F*(1, 400) = 0.72, *p* = .40), but
there was a significant increase regarding Hepatitis knowledge between
pre-test and post-test across conditions (*M* = 6.4 vs. 8.3,
*F*(1,400) = 172.98, *p*\<.001, Cohen\'s d = 0.65), which can be defined
as a moderate effect size.

:::: table-wrap
10.1371/journal.pone.0057067.t001

::: caption
###### Differences in website use between conditions.
:::

![]()

  Variable                  Experimental condition   Control condition   *t*     *p*     Cohen\'s d         
  ------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------- ------- ------- ------------ ----- ------
                            M                        SD                  M       SD                         
  Number of pages (0--12)   7.5                      4.0                 8.0     3.8     1.44         .15   0.14
  Time on website (sec)     151.0                    117.4               150.8   107.8   0.01         .99   0.00
::::

## User perceptions

There were no differences between conditions in terms of efficiency
(*F*(1, 456) = 0.84, *p* = .36), effectiveness (*F*(1, 456) = 0.03,
*p* = .87), enjoyment (*F*(1, 456) = 0.08, *p* = .78), active trust
(*F*(1, 456) = 0.03, *p* = .87) and interest (*F*(1, 456) = 0.07,
*p* = .80). [Figure 5](#) illustrates the final structural equation
model testing the associations between user perceptions and website use
across conditions, because there were no differences on both measures of
website use. The final model is mostly in line with Hypothesis 2:
Efficiency (*M* = 6.5, *SD* = 0.84), effectiveness (*M* = 6.4,
*SD* = 0.87), and enjoyment (*M* = 5.6, *SD* = 1.21) were positively
associated with website use and these associations were partly mediated
by active trust (*M* = 5.8, *SD* = 1.23). The association between
efficiency and website use, however, was fully mediated by active trust.
Since there were no differences between conditions in terms of website
use, there is neither support for Hypothesis 3a nor for Hypothesis 3b.
Interest (*M* = 5.9, *SD* = 1.06), however, was positively associated
with and contributed to explaining variance in website use besides
efficiency, effectiveness, enjoyment, and active trust. The explained
variance (R^2^) of the number of pages visited and time on the website
is .63 and .51 respectively. The CFI and TLI are .98 and .97,
respectively; RMSEA and SRMR are .06 and .04, respectively. All of these
fit indices indicate a close fit for the final model.

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0057067.g005
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Final model including standardized betas of significant
paths within the model.</figcaption>
</figure>
