Abstract

*Background*. In view of the adverse effects of using restraints,
studies examining the use of restraint reduction programs (RRPs) are
needed. *Objectives*. To investigate the effect of an RRP on the
reduction of physical restraint rates in rehabilitation hospitals.
*Methods*. A prospective quasi-experimental clinical trial was
conducted. Demographic data, medical and health-related information on
recruited patients from two rehabilitation hospitals, as well as
facility data on restraint rates were collected. *Results*. The increase
in the restraint rate in the control site was 4.3 times greater than
that in the intervention site. Changes in the restraint mode, from
continuous to intermittent, and the type of restraint used were found
between the pre- and postintervention periods in both the control site
and the intervention site. *Discussion*. Compared with that in the
control site, the RRP in the intervention site helped arrest any
increase in the restraint rate although it had no effect on physical
restraint reduction. The shift of restraint mode from continuous to
intermittent in the intervention site was one of the positive outcomes
of the RRP.

# 3. Results

The samples in the two hospitals were first compared in terms of their
demographic and clinical characteristics. The preintervention sample at
the intervention facility was considerably older---mean age 75.4 (SD
10.7) versus 59.1 (SD 17.4) of the control facility (*P* \< 0.001). The
two samples were different in terms of the number of medical diagnosis,
with the study site having a mean of 3.1 diagnoses (SD 1.5) versus the
control site\'s mean of 1.8 diagnoses (SD 1.2) (*P* \< 0.001); the mean
MMSE score of the study site was 16.7 (SD 7.0) versus control site\'s
25.4 (SD 5.3) (*P* \< 0.001); the mean MBI score was 12.7 (SD 5.5) in
the study site versus control site\'s mean 15.1 score (SD 3.2) (*P* \<
0.001). There were no significant differences found in all the other
clinical and demographic variables.

The postintervention sample at the study site remained considerably
older, with a mean age of 74.8 (SD 10.6) versus 62.9 (SD 17.7) in the
control site (*P* \< 0.001). Again, the two samples were different in
terms of the number of medical diagnosis, with the study site having a
mean of 3.2 diagnoses (SD 1.5) versus control site\'s mean of 1.9
diagnoses (SD 1.2) (*P* \< 0.001); the mean MMSE score of the study site
was 16.4 (SD 7.2) versus control site\'s 24.4 (SD 6.5) (*P* \< 0.001);
the mean MBI score of the study site was 12.0 (SD 5.1) versus control
site\'s mean 15.1 (SD 3.4) (*P* \< 0.001). The two facilities were also
significantly different in terms of their gender composition---49.0%
males in the study site versus 34.8% males in the control site. No other
significant differences were found in clinical and demographic variables
between the two hospital samples in the post-intervention period.

Then the baseline sample profile of the patients before the intervention
in the study and control site were compared (Tables [1](#)(a) and
[1](#)(b)). The control site had a significantly younger patient group
than the study site (*P* \< 0.001) in the nonrestrained patient group.
This younger patient group probably resulted in the higher cognitive
status as reflected in the significantly higher mean MMSE total score
(*P* \< 0.001) and the lower risk of fall as reflected in the lower
Morse Fall Scale score (*P* \< 0.001) ([Table 1(a)](#)). Restrained
patients had a similar sample profile in both the study and control
sites. However, significant differences were found in age (*P* \< 0.01)
in both the nonrestrained and restrained groups of patients between the
study and control sites. A significant difference in the experiences of
falling in hospital (*P* \< 0.01) was also found in the nonrestrained
patients ([Table 1(b)](#)).

Last, the profiles of those who were restrained and nonrestrained were
compared in each of the study sites. Tables [2](#)(a) and [2](#)(b)
provide information about the categorical variables of the samples
recruited during the pre- and postintervention period in both sites.
Significant differences were found in the MBI score (*P* = 0.016) and
vision (*P* \< 0.001) in the study site in the postintervention period
when compared with the preintervention period. The mean MBI score was
worse (30.3 versus 31.5) while there were more people with normal vision
(39.2% versus 51.2%) after intervention.

For the control site, there were significant differences in the age (*P*
= 0.039) and the Morse fall scale (*P* \< 0.001) in the postintervention
when compared with the pre-intervention phase. The mean age was older
(59.1 versus 62.9) and the mean MFS score (20.7 versus 30.3) showed a
slightly higher risk post-intervention.

To answer the primary research question of whether a reduction in
restraint rates had been attained in the post-intervention period, the
prevalence of restraint was calculated. In the control site, the overall
restraint rate (including both intermittent and continuous)
significantly increased from 2.6 to 8.3% (*P* \< 0.000). Both
intermittent and continuous use of restraint were significantly
increased in the postintervention period, with intermittent restraint
use increasing from 0.2 to 3.3% (*P* \< 0.001) and continuous restraint
use increasing from 2.4 to 5% (*P* \< 0.001) ([Table 3](#)).

In the study site, there was no significant difference in the overall
restraint rate between the pre- and postintervention periods although
the overall restraint rate had a slightly upward trend from 11.5% to
13.6% (*P* = 0.405) postintervention. There was a significant increase
in the use of intermittent restraint, from 0.7 to 5.1% (*P* \< 0.001),
but a significant decrease of continuous restraint from 10.8 to 8.5%
(*P* \< 0.001) ([Table 3](#)) was also recorded.

We analyzed the subsample recruited into the RRC (those complex cases
who were brought to the multidisciplinary team for discussion about
their progress). In this subsample, we found that there was a
significant increase of patients with their restraints taken off after
RRC conference (0% versus 18.2%, *P* = 0.014). There was an
insignificant but slight increase of intermittent restraint (from 14.5%
to 18.2%, *P* = 0.317), and there was a significant decrease of
continuous restraint after RRC conference (from 85.5% to 63.6%, *P* =
0.009). These data provided further evidence that there was a positive
direction of changes in practice in the intervention site. There was a
significant increase in the use of bedrails and lap tables and a
significant decrease in the use of waist belts and jackets after
intervention in the control site. The bed rail was the most common type
of restraint (61.9%), followed by the jacket restraint and waist belt
(both at 14.3%), with lap tables as the least common (9.5%) after
intervention.

In the study site, there was a decrease in the use of lap tables (from
48.0% to 39.2%) after intervention, but at the same time, there was an
increase in the use of bed rails (43.3% to 51.8%) at the study site
([Table 2(b)](#)). Bed rail was the most common type of restraint,
followed by lap table (39.2%) and jacket restraint (8.6%) in the
postintervention period.

Because any increase or decrease in physical restraint use may imply a
concomitant change in the use of chemical restraint, the subjects\' use
of psychotropic medications were also examined. No significant
differences were found in the use of psychotropic medications in the
study site (*P* = 0.346) and the control site (*P* = 0.075) comparing
pre- and postintervention data. Both sites had a low rate in the use of
psychotropic drugs to begin with and remained as such after
intervention. In the study site, only 3.3% of the subjects were
prescribed psychotropic medications before intervention, and 2.3% were
prescribed psychotropic drugs after intervention. In the control site,
2% of the subjects were on psychotropic medications, and none were
prescribed (0%) after intervention.

The staff profiles were examined to see if there might be the
possibility of impacting on the study outcomes. In the intervention
site, the staff response rate in the preintervention survey was 82.2%
(*N* = 97) and 77.4% after intervention (*N* = 89). No significant
differences were found in their gender (*P* = 0.535), years of clinical
experience (*P* = 0.684), with or without on-the-job training about
restraint use (*P* = 0.179) pre- and post-intervention. Also, no
significant differences were found in terms of knowledge (*P* = 0.147),
attitude (*P* = 0.071), and practice (*P* = 0.139) before and after
intervention using Janelli et al.\'s (1991) validated questionnaire.
When further analysis were conducted, a subsample of nurses (of one
unit) were found to have better knowledge after intervention (mean score
results: 5.51 versus 6.23, *P* = 0.04).

In the control site, the staff response rate before intervention was
51.5% (*N* = 17) and 77.8% after intervention (*N* = 28). No significant
differences were found in their gender (*P* = 0.431), years of clinical
experience (*P* = 0.516), and with or without on the job training about
restraint use (*P* = 0.948). Moreover, no significant differences were
found in terms of knowledge (*P* = 0.436) and attitude (*P* = 0.498).
There was, however, a significant decrease in their practice score (from
38.41 to 36.43, *P* = 0.048). The problematic practice behaviors
included item C7 (I tell family members why the patient is being
restrained), C8 (I explain to the patient why the restraint is being
applied), and C9 (I tell the patient when the restraint will be
removed).

When comparing nursing staff samples of between the study and control
sites, there were no significant differences observed in their gender
distribution (before intervention: *P* = 0.279 and after intervention:
*P* = 0.348), years of clinical experience (before intervention: *P* =
0.369; after intervention: *P* = 0.055), and with or without on the job
training about restraint use (before intervention: *P* = 0.153; after
intervention: *P* = 0.176). No significant differences were found in
terms of knowledge (*P* = 0.230) and attitude (*P* = 0.986). However,
there was a significant difference in their mean practice score (38.41
versus 36.43, *P* = 0.037), with the control site having relatively
poorer scores.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
\(a\) Sample profile before intervention (I)
:::

                     Nonrestrained            Restrained                                                                                 
  ------------------ ------------------------ -------------------------- ------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------
  Mean/SD            Study site (*n* = 270)   Control site (*n* = 142)   *P*-value\*   Study site (*n* = 128)   Control site (*n* = 6)   *P*-value\*
  Age                74.18/10.88              54.69/17.36                \<0.001       78.03/9.88               69.67/14.43              0.16
  MMSE               18.64/6.45               25.66/4.96                 \<0.001       12.71/6.39               18.50/7.82               0.053
  MBI                14.30/5.00               15.23/3.08                 0.69          9.23/5.05                11.33/3.98               0.221
  Morse Fall Scale   29.98/16.80              20.77/15.37                \<0.001       31.05/17.85              20.00/18.71              0.085

MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination; MBI: Morse Fall Scale.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
\(b\) Sample profile before intervention (II)
:::

  ----------------------------- -------- ------------------------ -------------------------- ------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------
                                         Nonrestrained            Restrained                                                                                 
                                \%       Study site (*n* = 270)   Control site (*n* = 142)   *P*-value\*   Study site (*n* = 128)   Control site (*n* = 6)   *P*-value\*
                                                                                                                                                             
  Gender                        M        52.6                     40.1                       0.016         33.6                     83.3                     0.013
  F                             47.4     59.9                                                66.4          16.7                                              
  Psychoactive drug             Yes      1.9                      2.1                        0.855         6.3                      0                        0.528
  No                            98.1     97.9                                                93.8          100                                               
  Vision                        Normal   39.6                     43                         0.514         38.3                     33.3                     0.807
  Impaired                      60.4     57                                                  61.7          66.7                                              
  Hearing                       Normal   84.1                     88.7                       0.2           80.8                     83.3                     0.862
  Impaired                      15.9     11.3                                                19.2          16.7                                              
  History of fall in hospital   Yes      99.3                     95.1                       0.006         100                      100                      N/A
  No                            0.7      4.9                                                 0             0                                                 
  ----------------------------- -------- ------------------------ -------------------------- ------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
\(a\) Sample profile of study and control sites (I)
:::

                                                                                  Age              No. of diagnoses   MMSE           MBI                Morse fall scale
  ------------------------ ----------------------- ----------- ------------------ ---------------- ------------------ -------------- ------------------ ------------------
  Intervention site        Preintervention phase   *n* = 398   Mean ± SD          75.42 ± 10.71    3.05 ± 1.45^a^     16.74 ± 7.00   12.67 ± 5.54       30.33 ± 17.13
  Median/range             77/31--100              3/1--7      17/0--30           13/0--20         25/0--80                                             
  Postintervention phase   *n* = 612               Mean ± SD   74.80 ± 10.57      3.15 ± 1.50^b^   16.42 ± 7.15       11.99 ± 5.12   31.54 ± 17.13^a^   
  Median/range             76/23--98               3/1--9      16/0--30           13/0--20         25/0--90                                             
                                                   *P*\*       0.200              0.286            0.375              0.016          0.239              
  Control site             Preintervention phase   *n* = 148   Mean ± SD          59.14 ± 17.35    1.80 ± 1.159       25.37 ± 5.26   15.07 ± 3.20       20.74 ± 15.45
  Median/range             64/17--88               1/1--7      27/0--30           15/4--20         15/0--80                                             
  Postintervention phase   *n* = 155               Mean ± SD   62.90 ± 17.73^c^   1.93 ± 1.21      24.39 ± 6.53       15.07 ± 3.41   30.26 ± 16.91      
  Median/range             67/15--93               2/1--7      27/4--30           16/3--20         25/0--75                                             
                                                   *P*\*       0.039              0.284            0.583              0.485          \<.001             

MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination; MBI: Morse Fall Scale.

\*Mann-Whitney *U* test, significant at 0.05.

^a^One missing subject.

^b^Three missing subjects.

^c^One missing subject.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
\(b\) Sample profile of study and control sites (II)
:::

  ----------------------------- --------------------- -------------------- ----------- --------------------- -------------------- ----------- ------ ----------- ------ -----------
                                Study site            Control site                                                                                                      
                                Before intervention   After intervention   (*X^2^*)    Before intervention   After intervention   (*X^2^*)                              
                                *n* = 398             \%                   *n* = 612   \%                    *P*-value            *n* = 148   \%     *n* = 155   \%     *P*-value
                                                                                                                                                                        
  Gender                                                                                                                                                                
   M                            185                   46.5                 300         49                    0.43                 62          41.9   54          34.8   0.207
   F                            213                   53.5                 312         51                    86                   58.1        101    65.2               
  Psychoactive drug                                                                                                                                                     
   Yes                          13                    3.3                  14          2.3                   0.346                3           2      0           0      0.075
   No                           385                   96.7                 598         97.7                  145                  98          155    100                
  Vision                                                                                                                                                                
   Normal                       156                   39.2                 308         51\. 2                \<0.001              63          42.6   68          43.9   0.819
   Impaired                     242                   60.8                 293         48.8                  85                   57.4        87     56.1               
  Hearing                                                                                                                                                               
   Normal                       330                   82.9                 502         83.5                  0.729                131         88.5   132         85.2   0.389
   Impaired                     68                    17.1                 99          16.5                  17                   11.5        23     14.8               
  Restraint status                                                                                                                                                      
   Never^a^                     270                   67.8                 309         50.5                  \<0.001              142         95.9   134         86.5   0.01
   Intermittent^b^              36                    9                    147         24                    4                    2.7         9      5.8                
   Continuous^c^                92                    23.1                 152         24.8                  2                    1.4         12     7.7                
  Type of restraint                                                                                                                                                     
   Lap table                    61                    48                   118         39.2                  0.334                0           0      2           9.5    0.008
   Vest                         11                    8.7                  26          8.6                   1                    16.7        3      14.3               
   Wrist                        0                     0                    1           0.3                                        ---         ---    ---         ---    
   Pelvic belt                  ---                   ---                  ---         ---                   2                    33.3        0      0                  
   Waist belt                   ---                   ---                  ---         ---                                        2           33.3   3           14.3   
   Mittens                      ---                   ---                  ---         ---                   1                    16.7        0      0                  
   Others (bed rails)           55                    43.3                 156         51.8                  0                    0           13     61.9               
  History of fall in hospital                                                                                                                                           
   Yes                          2                     0.5                  6           1                     0.402                7           4.7    10          6.5    0.515
   No                           396                   99.5                 606         99                    141                  95.3        145    93.5               
  ----------------------------- --------------------- -------------------- ----------- --------------------- -------------------- ----------- ------ ----------- ------ -----------

*P*-values: a versus b in Control site: \<0.001, b versus c: \<0.001, a
versus c: \<0.001.

*P*-values: a versus b in Study site: \<0.001, b versus c: \<0.001, a
versus c: 0.013.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Comparison of the pre- and postintervention restraint rates in the study
and control sites.
:::

                           Study site              Control site                                                                                     
  ------------------------ ----------------------- ------------------------ ---------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ ----------------------
                           Preintervention phase   Postintervention phase                          Preintervention phase   Postintervention phase   
                           *n* = 463               *n* = 562                *P*-value (*t*-test)   *n* = 305               *n* = 310                *P*-value (*t*-test)
                           M (%) ± SD              M (%) ± SD                                      M (%) ± SD              M (%) ± SD               
                                                                                                                                                    
  Intermittent restraint                                                                                                                            
  A/D                      0.6 ± 0.02              7.1 ± 0.08               \<0.001                0.4 ± 0.01              6.3 ± 0.05               \<0.001
  P/D                      0.7 ± 0.02              3.7 ± 0.05               \<0.001                                                                 
  N                        1.0 ± 0.02              2.8 ± 0.04               \<0.001                0.0 ± 0.00              0.4 ± 0.02               0.019
  Overall                  0.7 ± 0.02              5.1 ± 0.07               \<0.001                0.2 ± 0.01              3.3 ± 0.05               \<0.001
  Continuous restraint                                                                                                                              
  A                        10.7 ± 0.12             8.3 ± 0.07               0.001                  4.2 ± 0.03              6.6 ± 0.05               \<0.001
  P                        11.6 ± 0.15             7.6 ± 0.07               \<0.001                                                                 
  N                        10.0 ± 0.12             10.5 ± 0.07              0.592                  0.6 ± 0.02              3.5 ± 0.03               \<0.001
  Overall                  10.8 ± 0.13             8.5 ± 0.07               \<0.001                2.4 ± 0.03              5.0 ± 0.05               \<0.001

A/D: am shift for Study site; or day shift for Control site.

P/D: pm-shift for Study site; or day-shift for Control site.

N: night-shift.

*n*: number of shifts.

\*restraint rate: the number of patients being restrained/the total
number of patients in the ward per shift.
::::
