Abstract

## Background

Despite being present in up to 1% of the population, few controlled
trials have examined the efficacy of treatments for bipolar II
depression. Pooled data are presented from four placebo-controlled
studies (BOLDER I \[5077US/0049\] and II \[D1447C00135\]; EMBOLDEN I
\[D1447C00001\] and II \[D1447C00134\]) that evaluated the efficacy of
quetiapine monotherapy for depressive episodes in patients with bipolar
II disorder.

## Methods

All studies included an 8-week, double-blind treatment phase in which
patients were randomly assigned to treatment with quetiapine 300 mg/day,
quetiapine 600 mg/day, or placebo. Outcome measures included the change
from baseline in MADRS total score at week 8, effect sizes, and MADRS
response and remission rates.

## Results and discussion

Improvements in mean MADRS total scores from baseline to week 8 were
significantly greater with quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day (−15.58
\[*n* = 283\] and −14.88 \[*n* = 289\]; *p* \< 0.001) compared with
placebo (−11.61 \[*n* = 204\]). The MADRS effect sizes were 0.44 for
quetiapine 300 mg/day and 0.47 for 600 mg/day (*p* \< 0.001 vs placebo).
Significantly higher proportions of patients receiving quetiapine, at
both doses, than placebo-treated patients achieved response and
remission at week 8 (*p* \< 0.01). Common adverse events associated with
quetiapine (both doses) included dry mouth, somnolence, sedation,
dizziness, and headache. Rates of mania and hypomania were similar for
quetiapine and placebo. Quetiapine monotherapy demonstrated significant
efficacy compared with placebo and was generally well tolerated in the
treatment of bipolar II depression.

# Results

Patient disposition is shown in Figure [1](#). A total of 776 (35.2%)
patients with bipolar II depression were included in the ITT population
(283, 289, and 204 patients received quetiapine 300 mg/day, quetiapine
600 mg/day, or placebo, respectively). The safety population comprised
819 patients with bipolar II depression (298, 307, and 214 patients
received quetiapine 300 mg/day, quetiapine 600 mg/day, or placebo,
respectively), representing 35.4% of the total pooled safety population
of patients with bipolar I or II depression from the four studies
(*N* = 2,314).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Patient disposition.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

At baseline, the demographic and clinical characteristics were similar
among treatment groups (Table [1](#)). The baseline symptom severity
scores indicated a patient population with moderate to severe depression
without mania symptoms.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics (safety
population)**
:::

                                     Quetiapine 300 mg/day ( ***n***  = 298)   Quetiapine 600 mg/day ( ***n***  = 307)   Placebo (***n*** = 214)
  ---------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- -------------------------
  Gender,%                                                                                                               
    Male                             36.9                                      39.7                                      37.4
    Female                           63.1                                      60.3                                      62.6
  Age, mean (years)                  38.4                                      39.4                                      37.7
  Weight, mean (kg)                  79.7                                      80.1                                      78.9
  BMI, mean                          28.0                                      28.0                                      27.8
  Symptom rating, mean total score                                                                                       
    MADRS                            27.8                                      27.5                                      28.0
    HAM-D                            24.2                                      24.0                                      24.2
    YMRS                             4.5                                       4.5                                       5.0
    HAM-A                            19.2                                      18.6                                      19.1
::::

## Primary efficacy outcome: Montgomery-Åsberg depression rating scale total score

Among patients with bipolar II disorder, treatment with quetiapine
resulted in significantly greater improvements in depression symptoms
compared with placebo, as measured by mean change in MADRS total score
from baseline to week 8 (mean \[SE\] −15.58 \[0.62\] and −14.88 \[0.62\]
for quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day, respectively, vs−11.61 \[0.70\] for
placebo; LOCF; *p* \< 0.001, both doses). Significant separation from
placebo was observed from week 1 for both doses of quetiapine and was
maintained through week 8 (Figure [2](#)). Effect sizes, based on MADRS
scores, were moderate for both quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day (MMRM: 0.44
and 0.47, respectively, *p* \< 0.001 vs placebo; Figure [3](#)). The
effect sizes in the bipolar I population in the four trials were 0.58
for quetiapine 300 mg/day and 0.64 for quetiapine 600 mg/day
(Figure [3](#)).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Mean change from baseline to week 8 in MADRS total
score (ITT population; LOCF).</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Effect sizes of quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day in
patients with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

Patients with bipolar II disorder stratified by a rapid- (≥4 mood
episodes per year) or nonrapid-cycling course also demonstrated
significant improvements in MADRS total score at week 8. Among patients
without a rapid-cycling course, MADRS total score improved significantly
by a mean (SE) of 15.18 (0.67) and 14.25 (0.66) with quetiapine 300 and
600 mg/day compared with 11.58 (0.75) points for placebo (*p* \< 0.001
and *p* = 0.005 for quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day, respectively) at week
8. Significant symptomatic improvements at week 8 were also observed in
patients with rapid cycling: 16.80 (1.63) and 16.92 (1.71) for
quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day versus 11.12 (1.95) for placebo
(*p* = 0.011 and *p* = 0.012, respectively). In the exploratory analysis
of the relationship between MADRS total score at baseline and end of
treatment, there was an indication that the difference between placebo
and both quetiapine doses at end of treatment increased as baseline
score increased (Table [2](#); Figure [4](#)). However, given the *post
hoc* and exploratory nature of this analysis where the studies were not
designed for this purpose, no formal inference can be made.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Relationship between MADRS total score at baseline and of treatment
(ITT) (ANCOVA with baseline score as covariate and treatment as fixed
effect)**
:::

  Treatment               Dependent variable          Fixed factor        Estimate   Degrees of freedom   ***t*** value   ***p*** value
  ----------------------- --------------------------- ------------------- ---------- -------------------- --------------- ---------------
  Quetiapine 300 mg/day   MADRS at end of treatment   Intercept           −0.242     281                  −0.11           0.9119
                                                      MADRS at baseline   0.445      281                  5.86            \<0.0001
  Quetiapine 600 mg/day   MADRS at end of treatment   Intercept           1.127      287                  0.53            0.5998
                                                      MADRS at baseline   0.423      287                  5.59            \<0.0001
  Placebo                 MADRS at end of treatment   Intercept           −4.302     202                  −1.26           0.2086
                                                      MADRS at baseline   0.741      202                  6.23            \<0.0001
::::

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Relationship between MADRS total score at baseline
and of treatment (ITT).</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

## Secondary efficacy outcomes

### MADRS item analyses

Following 8 weeks of treatment, quetiapine at doses of 300 and
600 mg/day was associated with significant improvements in the majority
of the individual MADRS items when compared with placebo (*p* \< 0.05 vs
placebo, Figure [5](#)), with the exceptions of apparent sadness for
quetiapine 300 mg/day, and concentration difficulties and lassitude for
600 mg/day. From week 4 onward, there were significantly greater
improvements in MADRS Item 10 (suicidal thoughts) scores with both doses
of quetiapine (*p* \< 0.05 vs placebo).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Difference in mean change from baseline in MADRS
individual item scores at week 8 (ITT population;
LOCF).</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

### MADRS response and remission

By week 8, significantly higher proportions of patients treated with
quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day had achieved response and remission when
compared with placebo. Among quetiapine-treated patients, 64.7%
(300 mg/day) and 62.6% (600 mg/day) were classified as responders at
week 8 compared with 49.0% of placebo-treated patients (*p* \< 0.001 and
*p* \< 0.01 for 300 and 600 mg/day, respectively; ITT, LOCF). When
compared with placebo (46.1%), significantly more quetiapine-treated
patients met remission criteria at week 8 (65.0% and 61.9%,
respectively; *p* \< 0.001 vs placebo; ITT, LOCF). At week 8, NNT for
response and remission were 6 and 5 for quetiapine 300 mg/day and 7 and
6 for quetiapine 600 mg/day, respectively.

### Hamilton rating scale for depression total score

Patients who were treated with quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day
demonstrated significantly greater improvements in HAM-D total score
from week 1 through week 8 compared with placebo (*p* \< 0.001; ITT,
LOCF). At week 8, HAM-D total scores improved by a mean (SE) of 14.00
(0.49) and 13.57 (0.49) points for quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day,
respectively, versus 10.88 (0.55) for placebo (*p* \< 0.001).

### Hamilton rating scale for anxiety total score

Following quetiapine treatment, patients demonstrated significant
improvements in symptoms of anxiety, as measured by mean change from
baseline in HAM-A total score at week 8 (*p* \< 0.05 both doses vs
placebo; Figure [6](#)). Significant improvements in HAM-A total score
with quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day versus placebo were observed from
week 1 onward (−9.62 \[*p* \< 0.001\] and −8.89 \[*p* \< 0.05\] vs −7.34
at week 8, respectively; ITT, LOCF).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Mean change from baseline to week 8 in HAM-A total
score (ITT population; LOCF).</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

### Safety

Overall rates of adverse events in the pooled safety population were
73.8%, 74.3%, and 67.8% for the quetiapine 300 mg/day, 600 mg/day, and
placebo arms, respectively. As shown in Table [3](#), common adverse
events associated with quetiapine 300 and 600 mg/day included dry mouth,
somnolence, sedation, and dizziness. Adverse events potentially related
to extrapyramidal symptoms were observed in 12.4%, 8.8%, and 6.1% of the
quetiapine 300 mg/day, quetiapine 600 mg/day, and placebo groups,
respectively. Rates of treatment-emergent mania/hypomania during acute
treatment were similar among the treatment groups: 1.3%, 3.3%, and 2.3%
for quetiapine 300 mg/day, 600 mg/day, and placebo arms, respectively.
Rates of discontinuation because of adverse events were 12.1% for
quetiapine 300 mg/day, 17.9% for quetiapine 600 mg/day, and 5.1% for
placebo. Changes from baseline in weight and laboratory parameters
during acute treatment are presented in Table [4](#). Although average
weight gain was only about 1 kg greater in the two groups receiving
quetiapine, the proportions of patients in both arms gaining at least 7%
body weight was higher in both quetiapine arms (Table [4](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Common adverse events (≥5**% **of patients in any group; safety
population)**
:::

  Adverse event, ***N*** (%)          Quetiapine 300 mg/day (***n*** = 298)   Quetiapine 600 mg/day (***n*** = 307)   Placebo (***n*** = 214)
  ----------------------------------- --------------------------------------- --------------------------------------- -------------------------
  Dry mouth                           94 (31.5)                               90 (29.3)                               21 (9.8)
  Somnolence                          65 (21.8)                               60 (19.5)                               18 (8.4)
  Sedation                            60 (20.1)                               59 (19.2)                               12 (5.6)
  Dizziness                           39 (13.1)                               48 (15.6)                               12 (5.6)
  Headache                            27 (9.1)                                37 (12.1)                               40 (18.7)
  Fatigue                             26 (8.7)                                30 (9.8)                                14 (6.5)
  Constipation                        24 (8.1)                                24 (7.8)                                9 (4.2)
  Nausea                              23 (7.7)                                22 (7.2)                                21 (9.8)
  Diarrhea                            12 (4.0)                                8 (2.6)                                 17 (7.9)
  Insomnia                            8 (2.7)                                 2 (0.7)                                 14 (6.5)
  Upper respiratory tract infection   7 (2.3)                                 7 (2.3)                                 11 (5.1)
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Weight, glucose, and lipid data (all samples; safety population)**
:::

  Mean change from randomization (SD)^a^   Quetiapine 300 mg/day (***n*** = 298)   Quetiapine 600 mg/day (***n*** = 307)   Placebo (***n*** = 214)
  ---------------------------------------- --------------------------------------- --------------------------------------- -------------------------
  Total cholesterol (mg/dL)                −2.3 (2.1)                              0.8 (2.0)                               −3.5 (2.5)
  LDL cholesterol (mg/dL)                  −5.3 (1.7)                              −0.3 (1.7)                              −4.4 (1.9)
  HDL cholesterol (mg/dL)                  −0.5 (0.6)                              −1.6 (0.6)                              −1.0 (0.7)
  Triglycerides (mg/dL)                    21.4 (5.9)                              14.2 (4.9)                              9.0 (7.4)
  Glucose (mg/dL)                          3.3 (1.0)                               2.8 (0.9)                               1.8 (1.1)
  Insulin (pmol/L)                         31.0 (8.4)                              24.2 (6.1)                              12.5 (8.5)
  Mean weight change, kg (SE)              1.0 (0.19)                              1.1 (0.23)                              0.0 (0.17)
  Weight change ≥7%, *n* (%)               17 (6.5)                                24 (9.7)                                4 (2.2)

^a^Mean change from randomization to continuation phase to the end of
treatment.
::::
