Abstract

## Background

Data about the vaccination status of participants are required in
epidemiological cohort studies whenever infection or immunity is
considered as potential exposure or outcome. Within Pretest 2 of the
German National Cohort (GNC) we therefore investigated the acceptance
and feasibility of extracting vaccination status from vaccination
certificates provided by the participants of the study.

## Methods

This study was conducted in three study centers (Bremen, n = 73;
Hamburg, n = 200; Hannover, n = 193). In order to test if an additional
reminder would prevent participants from forgetting their vaccination
certificates at home persons willing to participate in Pretest 2 were
randomly assigned to one of three invitation groups (IG). About one
third of the participants received either no further reminder (IG1), a
reminder card together with the appointment letter (IG2) or a separate
reminder card 4 days before the appointment (IG3). At the study center,
vaccination data were scanned or copied and entered into a database
using a unique identification number. Participants were also asked to
fill in a short questionnaire to assess the completeness of the provided
vaccination data. Additionally, in one of the three participating study
centers, general practitioners (GP) were asked to provide vaccination
data from their records following respective participants' consent.
Finally, we compared the influenza data from the vaccination
certificates with the influenza data obtained from participants in
Pretest 2 by use of a self-administered questionnaire (ID-Screen).

## Results

Due to different starting dates of the study the intended reminder
procedure was implemented only in Hamburg and Hannover. In Hamburg,
significantly more vaccination certificates were submitted by the group
which received the reminder card separately 4 days before the
examination (IG3) compared to IG1 and IG2 (*p* = 0.04). In Hannover, in
contrast, most vaccination certificates were brought by those who
received the reminder card together with the appointment letter.
Overall, the use of a reminder card had a positive but not significant
effect as 89 % (185/209) of participants who received the reminder card
submitted vaccination data versus 81 % (84/104) of participants who did
not receive any reminder card (*p* = 0.06). Of all Pretest 2
participants in Hannover, 62 % (120/193) gave written consent for data
collection by the GPs. In total, 114 practices were contacted of which
49 (43 %) sent vaccination data. All in all, 360 vaccination
certificates with 5065 documented vaccinations were entered into a
database, of which 4830 (95 %) were valid for analysis covering a period
from 1946 to 2012. The comparison of influenza vaccination data from
vaccination certificates to the remembered data from a self-completed
questionnaire showed an agreement of data in 46 % (84/184) of cases
(Kappa = 0.48). Influenza vaccinations were underreported in 4 % (7/170)
of self-completed questionnaires.

## Conclusion

The reliable documentation of vaccinations within the context of the GNC
proved to be feasible and thus recommendable at a large scale within the
GNC as participants showed high willingness and compliance in providing
available vaccination documents. An additional validation by means of
documents provided by physicians seems to be possible for more than a
quarter of participants. In order to maximize the likelyhood of
participants' of bringing their vaccination certificates it would be
sufficient to send a reminder card together with the appointment letter.

## Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi: 10.1007/s00103-014-2050-0)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

# Results

## Participation

The recruitment process for this feasibility study differed among the
participating study centers. On the one hand, the invitation procedure
consisting of three different invitation groups was implemented in
Hamburg and Hannover only, due to a later starting date in Bremen.
Consequently, all participants in Bremen invited to Pretest 2 received
by default the reminder card together with the appointment letter. On
the other hand, participation proportions for this feasibility study
could be calculated for Hannover only, as in Bremen and Hamburg the
consent for the vaccination data collection was integrated into the
consent form of the Pretest 2 baseline assessment whereas in Hannover
participants were asked for a separate consent. Recruitment data and
participation proportions per invitation group are shown in Fig. [2](#).
The participation proportions of the random samples are of special
interest because the study protocol for the GNC allows random samples
only; therefore, participation proportions will be discussed mainly in
this respect. Overall, 400 persons were invited to participate in this
feasibility study. In Hannover, 92.2 % (153/166) of Pretest 2
participants gave a separate written consent for the vaccination data
collection. Again 92.2 % (141/153) of these participants brought
vaccination certificates to the appointment. In Hamburg and Bremen,
where participants were not explicitly asked for their willingness to
participate in this feasibility study, the proportion of provided
vaccination certificates was slightly lower: 80.0 % (128/160, one
missing) of invited persons in Hamburg and 75.3 % (55/73) in Bremen
provided vaccination data.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Flow chart of the recruitment and submitted vaccination
certificates. <em>RS =</em> random sample from local registry,
<em>CS</em> = convenience sample, consisting of volunteers, e.g.
students, friends, colleagues and family members. Invitation group (IG):
Appointment letter + … IG1: no further reminder; IG2: a colored reminder
card together with the appointment letter; IG3: 4 days before the
appointment at the study center a separate, colored reminder card
(Fig. <a href="#">1</a>). <em>*</em>Hamburg: 1 missing case with no
information about assigned invitation group, <em>**</em>Participation:
Participants were asked for a separate consent for the vaccination data
collection in Hannover only, <em>***</em>Bremen: No documentation sheet
about the invitation process available. 75 % of invited persons provided
vaccination data the same day of examination or later.</figcaption>
</figure>

Considering the overall effect of the reminder card in Hamburg and
Hannover, 89 % (185/209) of participants who received a reminder card
(regardless if IG2 or IG3) brought their vaccination certificate
compared to 81 % (84/104) of those who did not receive any reminder card
(IG1; *p* = 0.06). The approach to send a separate reminder card 4 days
before the appointment was the most successful; 92 % (94/102)
participants of IG3 provided vaccination data compared to 85 % (91/107)
in IG2 (*p* = 0.06). Stratifications by study center indicated that in
Hannover participants in IG2 provided the most vaccination certificates
(95 %), whereas in Hamburg, significantly more vaccination certificates
(92 %) were provided in IG3, with no differences between IG1 and IG2
(chi-square^2^: 6.546, df 2, *p* = 0.04).

## Data provided by physicians

Of 193 Pretest 2 participants in Hannover, 120 (62 %) provided written
consent for the data collection by general practitioners. In one case
the consent was given but the participant had not been in contact with
the health care system for a long time so that he could not provide any
GP address. In total, 114 practices were contacted of which 43 %
(49/114) sent vaccination data. Two practices did not send any data
because no vaccination was given during the past 10 years. In most cases
the medical staff filled in the paper documentation sheet, with a few
providing computerized print-outs.

## Questionnaire

The short questionnaire was completed by 94.7 % (426/450) of
participants including the convenience sample. There were considerable
differences between the study centers. Whereas in Hamburg all
participants completed the questionnaire (200/200), this was the case
for 98.9 % (175/177) of the participants in Hannover, and for only 70 %
(51/73) in Bremen (data shown in supplement). Thorough data cleaning was
necessary because of inconsistent responses. For example, the question,
if the participant ever possessed a vaccination certificate was denied
by 16 persons of whom 5 persons submitted their vaccination certificate
to the study personnel the same day. A problem seemed to exist also if
more than one vaccination certificate existed so that participants were
not sure to which one to refer. Moreover the high percentage of missing
answers for most questions, coded as "don't know/no answer", suggests
that these questions were difficult to remember and thus not suitable
for a self-administered questionnaire.

Of all participants, 96 % had possessed a vaccination certificate once
during their life-time, with 91 % possessing one at the moment. There
were no differences between random and convenience samples. In all, 37 %
of responders indicated that the present vaccination certificate was the
first, whereas for 55 % of responders it was the second up to fourth
vaccination certificate. In addition, 67 % answered to have brought all
available vaccination data to the study center, 54 % included all
vaccinations ever received (random sample). Tetanus (18 %), influenza
(17 %) and vaccinations received in childhood (13 %) were indicated most
often as vaccinations not included in documentation.

The question regarding the attitude towards vaccinations was answered by
416/426 (98 %) participants. The attitude towards vaccinations was
assessed by 74 % of responders as positive. Of those 18 % being
critical, 45 % indicated fear the side effects of vaccinations and 30 %
were concerned that vaccinations might overwhelm the immune system.
Among other reasons, responders took the chance to explain more in
detail their critical attitude against specific vaccinations like
influenza vaccination because of bad experiences. Only one person
indicated to be in principle opposed to vaccinations; for 8 % of
responders vaccinations were no issues of concern. No statistical
difference of attitude towards vaccination could be detected between
persons who submitted their vaccination certificate compared to those
who did not submit any vaccination data.

## Capturing and availability of vaccination data

Overall 372 vaccination certificates were electronically captured or
copied the same day of examination, of which 7 % (27/372) of vaccination
certificates were lost primarily because of missing identification
numbers (ID) on the copy/scan. The procedure of blackening the personal
data before capturing the vaccination data electronically was not
followed consequently so that in about 17 % of documents this needed to
be worked over subsequently. The quality of vaccination certificates was
partly poor, especially the older ones (before 1990) often lacked the
names of given vaccines (1700 vaccines), or the date of vaccination. In
5 % (222) of cases, the vaccination date was missing, (partly) illegible
or cut off during the process of scanning/copying the vaccination data.
Some of these data (121 dates) could be recorded as described above.
Further problems encountered were the lack of information about vaccines
as single or combined vaccination or the illegibility of documented
vaccinations. The median time for data entry was 14.3 min per
vaccination certificate (minimum of 0.4 min; maximum of 124.3 min).
Including the data of physicians, vaccination data could be obtained for
a total of 82 % (367/450) of participants or 79 % (367/466) of all
eligible Pretest 2 participants. An overview of submitted vaccination
data per study center (number of valid vaccination documents and
vaccinations) including the sample characteristics of persons submitting
vaccination data is shown in Table [1](#). The documented vaccinations
covered a period from 1946 to 2012.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Submitted vaccination data and sample characteristics
:::

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Hamburg        Hannover         Bremen        Total                                      
  ----------------------------------------- -------------- ---------------- ------------- ---------------- ------- ------- --------- -------
  No. of valid documents                    158            155 (162^a^)     47            360 (367^a^)                               

  No. of vaccinations                       2402           1968 (2186^b^)   510           4880 (5098^b^)                             

  No. of vaccinations/person                15.2           13.9             10.9          14.1                                       

  Mean (95 % CI)                            (13.8--16.6)   (12.5--15.3)     (8.7--13.0)   (13.2--15.0)                               

  **Sample characteristics**                **n**          **%**            **n**         **%**            **n**   **%**   **n**     **%**

  Female                                    90             57.0             87            53.7             25      53.2    202       55.0

  Male                                      68             43.0             75            46.3             22      46.8    165       45.0

  20--29 years                              23             14.6             18            11.1             3       6.4     44        12.0

  30--39 years                              15             9.5              17            10.5             \-      \-      32        8.7

  40--49 years                              38             24.1             47            29.0             8       17.0    93        25.3

  50--59 years                              36             22.8             36            22.2             18      38.3    90        24.5

  60--69 years                              46             29.1             44            27.2             18      38.3    108       29.4

  Born abroad                               16             10.1             15            9.8              7       14.9    38        10.6

  First language German                     148            93.7             142           92.8             43      91.5    333       93.0

  Married                                   59             37.3             88            57.5             23      48.9    170       47.5

  Single                                    66             41.8             44            28.8             14      29.8    124       34.6

  Full time employed                        75             47.5             73            47.7             28      59.6    176       49.2

  Monthly household net income (median):\   83/146         56.8             73/141        51.8             19/46   41.3    175/333   52.6
   2250 € up to \                                                                                                                    
   3000 €                                                                                                                            

  **N**                                     **158**        **162**          **47**        **367**                                    
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*GNC* German National Cohort, *GP* general practitioners, *DEGS* Studie
zur Gesundheit Erwachsener in Deutschland, *GEDA* Gesundheit in
Deutschland aktuell, *CI* confidence interval

^a^(...): Including data of seven participants in Hannover (4 of random
and 3 of convenience sample) who provided physicians' data only (with 33
documented vaccinations) as no vaccination certificates were available

^b^(...): Including all vaccinations documented by physicians
(*n* = 218)
::::

## Comparison of vaccination data provided by participants and physicians

For 40 participants in Hannover vaccination data from vaccination
certificates and physicians' documentation were available with a total
of 630 documented vaccinations covering the period from 1956 to 2013.
Most frequently documented vaccinations are shown in Table [2](#).
Single vaccinations against poliomyelitis and tetanus were significantly
more often, influenza vaccinations significantly less often documented
in vaccination certificates than at the physicians' offices. To assess
the quality of vaccination documentation, the data captured by
vaccination certificates were compared to data provided by physicians.
Using the example of tetanus, 27 persons provided tetanus vaccination
information documented in vaccination certificates (125 vaccinations) as
well as documented by physicians (54 vaccinations). In all, 30 %
(38/125) of tetanus vaccinations documented in the vaccination
certificates corresponded exactly with tetanus vaccinations documented
by physicians for 20/27 persons (74 %). In these cases the date of
vaccination, the kind of vaccine and the producer of the vaccine were
documented identically in each document. A total of 6 % (7/125) of
documented tetanus vaccinations in the vaccination certificates did not
correspond to documented tetanus vaccinations by physicians for 6/27
persons (22 %). Tetanus documentation differed because either the name
of the vaccine was missing, not consistent or different producers of
vaccines were indicated. In addition, 8/54 (15 %) tetanus vaccinations
documented by physicians were not documented in the vaccination
certificates which accounts for at least 6 % (8/125) of tetanus
vaccinations missing in the vaccination certificates.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Frequency of vaccinations documented in vaccination certificates
compared to vaccinations documented by physicians
:::

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Document by                  Participant\       Physician\              
                               (1956--2012) ^a^   (1964--2013) ^a^        
  ---------------------------- ------------------ ------------------ ---- ------
  Single poliomyelitis         88                 20 %               13   7 %

  Single tetanus               68                 15 %               14   8 %

  Tetanus (combined vaccine)   118                27 %               40   22 %

  Influenza                    33                 7 %                66   36 %

  Single hepatitis B           22                 5 %                8    4 %\
                                                                          21

  Hepatitis A + B              20                 5 %                14   8 %

  No. of vaccinations          446                184                     
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Base: 40 participants with vaccination certificates and vaccination
documentation from physicians

^a^The vaccination certificates covered a period from 1956--2012, the
vaccination data sent by physicians from 1964--2013
::::

## Vaccination status

The vaccination coverage of responders (last dose no longer than
10 years ago) for some preventable diseases is shown in table [3](#).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Vaccination coverage according to vaccination certificates
:::

                Hamburg   Hannover   Bremen    Total                                              
  ------------- --------- ---------- --------- -------- -------- ------- --------- -------------- -------------
                n         \%         n         \%       n        \%      n         \% (95 % CI)   
  Tetanus       Female    74         82        66       76       21      84        161            80 (59--74)
  Male          45        66         49        65       16       73      110       66 (59--74)    
  Total         119       75         115       71       37       79      271       74 (69--78)    
  Diphtheria    Female    69         77        59       68       20      80        148            74 (67--80)
  Male          43        63         46        61       16       73      105       63 (56--71)    
  Total         112       71         105       65       36       77      253       69 (64--74)    
  Polio         Female    50         56        39       45       13      52        102            51 (44--58)
  Male          26        38         30        40       12       55      68        41 (33--49)    
  Total         76        48         69        43       25       53      170       46 (41--51)    
  Hepatitis B   Female    32         36        23       26       3       12        58             29 (23--35)
  Male          17        25         16        21       2        9       35        21 (15--27)    
  Total         49        31         39        24       5        11      93        25 (21--30)    
  Hepatitis A   Female    28         32        23       26       5       20        56             28 (22--34)
  Male          23        33         16        21       1        5       40        24 (18--31)    
  Total         51        32         39        24       6        13      96        26 (22--31)    
  **N**         **158**              **162**            **47**           **367**                  
  Measles^a^    Female    19         79        12       63       \-      \-        31             72 (58--86)
  Male          12        86         11        69       2        67      25        76 (60--91)    
  Total         31        82         23        66       2        67      56        74 (64--84)    
                **N**     **38**               **35**            **3**             **76**         

Number of persons who received at least one respective vaccination
within the last 10 years

^a^Vaccination against measles in Germany recommended since 1974. Base:
all participants of the age 20--39 years in the respective study centers
who submitted their vaccination certificates
::::

## Comparison of data from a self-completed questionnaire (ID-Screen) versus vaccination data from vaccination certificates

In Pretest 2, the ID-Screen questionnaire, a self-administered
questionnaire about infectious diseases, was applied in Hamburg and
Hannover (see Castell et al. in this issue). Three questions about
influenza vaccination were included: whether an influenza vaccination
has ever been received (V1), if yes, in which frequency (V2) and the
year of the last influenza vaccination (V3). In total 365 persons
answered the influenza questions. Vaccination documents were available
for 78 % (284/365) of these participants, which allowed assessing the
agreement of self-reported versus documented influenza vaccinations.
Half of all responders (184/365) indicated having ever been vaccinated
against the flu (Table [4](#)). Agreement with documentations was found
for 84 (46 %) of these responders \[Kappa 0.48\] with up to 20 influenza
vaccinations per person. Vaccination was underreported in 4 % (7/170) of
cases where the receipt of influenza vaccination was negated but
documented in the submitted vaccination records with up to
3 vaccinations per person. The "unvaccinated" responders were mostly
vaccinated in 2008--2010 (7/11 vaccinations). The self-reported year of
last influenza vaccination was confirmed by vaccination records in 27 %
of cases (41/150). In 23 % (35/150) of cases the self-reported year did
not correspond to the vaccination records because the year of the last
remembered influenza vaccination was before (19 %) or after (5 %) the
last influenza vaccination documented in the vaccination records.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Comparison of influenza data from a self-completed questionnaire (ID-
Screen) versus influenza vaccinations documented in vaccination records
:::

                 V1: ever vaccinated   V1: confirmed   V2: every year   V3: last year confirmed                        
  -------------- --------------------- --------------- ---------------- ------------------------- ---- ------ -------- ------
                 n                     \%              n                \%                        n    \%     n        \%
  Female         103                   52.8            53               51.5                      29   28.2   26/87    29.9
  Male           81                    47.6            31               38.3                      27   33.3   15/63    23.8
  Total          184/365               50.4            84               45.7                      56   30.4   41/150   27.3
  60--69 years   73/102                71.6            35               47.9                      30   41.1   13/63    20.6
  Hamburg        95/200                47.5            39               41.1                      31   32.6   17/76    22.4
  Hannover^a^    89/165                53.9            45               50.6                      25   28.1   24/74    32.4

*V1: ever vaccinated* Have you ever been vaccinated against influenza?
-- yes (ID-Screen questionnaire)

*V1, confirmed* Agreement between reported influenza vaccination (V1)
and documented influenza vaccinations in vaccination certificates. *V2*
Self-reported regularity of influenza vaccinations in ID- Screen
questionnaire (every year, almost every year, less often than every
year, only once)*V3, last year confirmed* Agreement between
self-reported year of last received influenza vaccination (*n* = 150)
and vaccination date found in vaccination certificates

^a^Hannover only: Including vaccination data provided by physicians
::::
