Abstract

## Background

Asthma is the most common chronic condition of childhood and
disproportionately affects inner-city minority children. Low rates of
asthma preventer medication adherence is a major contributor to poor
asthma control in these patients. Web-based methods have potential to
improve patient knowledge and medication adherence by providing
interactive patient education, monitoring of symptoms and medication
use, and by facilitation of communication and teamwork among patients
and health care providers. Few studies have evaluated web-based asthma
support environments using all of these potentially beneficial
interventions. The multidimensional website created for this study,
BostonBreathes, was designed to intervene on multiple levels, and was
evaluated in a pilot trial.

## Methods

An interactive, engaging website for children with asthma was developed
to promote adherence to asthma medications, provide a platform for
teamwork between caregivers and patients, and to provide primary care
providers with up-to-date symptom information and data on medication
use. Fifty-eight (58) children primarily from inner city Boston with
persistent-level asthma were randomised to either usual care or use of
BostonBreathes. Subjects completed asthma education activities, and
reported their symptoms and medication use. Primary care providers used
a separate interface to monitor their patients' website use, their
reported symptoms and medication use, and were able to communicate
online via a discussion board with their patients and with an asthma
specialist.

## Results

After 6-months, reported wheezing improved significantly in both
intervention and control groups, and there were significant improvements
in the intervention group only in night-time awakening and parental loss
of sleep, but there were no significant differences between intervention
and control groups in these measures. Emergency room or acute visits to
a physician for asthma did not significantly change in either group.
Among the subgroup of subjects with low controller medication adherence
at baseline, adherence improved significantly only in the intervention
group. Knowledge of the purpose of controller medicine increased
significantly in the intervention group, a statistically significant
improvement over the control group.

## Conclusions

This pilot study suggests that a multidimensional web-based educational,
monitoring, and communication platform may have positive influences on
pediatric patients' asthma-related knowledge and use of asthma preventer
medications.

# Results

983 children with asthma were identified through automated medical
record review. Of these, 520 (52.9%) were able to be reached and had an
eligible physician, 391 (75.2%) completed a phone screening, and 89
(22.8%) were deemed eligible for the study. Of the 89 eligible subjects,
31 declined to participate leaving 58 (65%) enrolled with 21 randomized
to the control group, and 37 randomized to the intervention group. See
Figure  [2](#) for Consort diagram.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Consort Diagram.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

At the 6 month end-point, the control group retained 14 (66.7%) of
enrolled subjects, and intervention group retained 28 (75.7%) of
subjects. The other subjects were lost to follow-up before the 6 month
end point. Analysis of the randomness of missing data for days of
wheeze, days had to slow down, nights woke-up, days limited activity,
days parent lose sleep and days missed school for asthma using the
permutation test indicated no significant dependence of drop out on the
outcome values. Thirteen \[ [13](#) \] physicians and 1 NP participated
in the study of whom 61% were female, the mean age was 45 years old, 95%
were located in an urban practice area, 22% were family physicians and
78% were pediatricians or pediatric NP.

Characteristics of the subjects are described in Table  [1](#) .
Overall, 58.6% of subjects were African-American, and 32.6% of household
reported earning less than \$15,000 per year. Most subjects (87.5%) had
some form of health insurance. Parents of control subjects were slightly
more likely to report high school education or above (78.4% of
intervention subject parents, versus 100% of control parents, P
= 0.041).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Sample Characteristics**
:::

  **Characteristic**                                           **Intervention, (N = 37)**   **Control, (N = 21)**   **P**
  ------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------- ----------------------- -------
  **Demographics**                                                                                                  
  Age (years)                                                                                                       
  Mean                                                         11.9 ± 2.0                   12.9 ± 3.0              0.13
  Median and Range                                             12 (8--16)                   14 (7--17)              
  Male gender                                                  22 (59.5%)                   12 (57.1%)              1.0
  Race                                                                                                              
  Hispanic                                                     4 (10.8%)                    2 (9.5%)                0.70
  Black                                                        20 (54.1%)                   14 (66.7%)              
  White                                                        8 (21.6%)                    2 (9.5%)                
  Other                                                        5 (13.5%)                    3 (14.3%)               
  Parental Education: at least High School completion          29 (78.4%)                   20 (100%)               0.041
  Employed caregiver in household                              29 (78.4%)                   13 (61.9%)              0.23
  Total family Income under \$15,000                           9 (28.1%)                    6 (42.9%)               0.50
  Child covered by health insurance                            32 (91.4%)                   17 (81%)                0.41
  **Home Environment**                                                                                              
  Cockroaches at home                                          8 (22.9%)                    7 (33.3%)               0.53
  Dog at home                                                  6 (17.1%)                    3 (14.3%)               1.0
  Cat at home                                                  6 (17.1%)                    9 (42.9%)               0.06
  Pet rodent at home                                           3 (8.6%)                     2 (9.5%)                1.0
  Smokers at home                                              8 (22.9%)                    9 (42.9%)               0.14
  **Computer Use**                                                                                                  
  Computer Competence Score, self reported (1--5), Mean (SD)   4.3 ± 0.6                    4.6 ± 0.5               0.07
  Hours/day on computer, Mean (SD)                             2.0 + 1.8                    1.6 + 1.6               0.51
  Type of Internet Connection                                                                                       
  Dial-Up                                                      10 (32.3%)                   2 (13.3%)               0.29
  Broadband                                                    21 (67.7%)                   13 (86.7%)              
  Able to log onto Boston Breathes website                                                                          
  With assistance                                              2 (7.1%)                     2 (11.1%)               0.64
  Without assistance                                           26 (92.9%)                   16 (88.9%)              
::::

Intervention subjects accessed the BostonBreathes site on average 7
times per month in the first month of the study, with decrease over time
(Figure  [3](#) ).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption><strong>Subject Logins to BostonBreathes Website, by
Month.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

## Clinical outcomes

Reported days of wheezing improved in both groups at the 6- month
endpoint (−1.4 days of wheezing per 2 weeks in intervention subjects,
and −4.2 days in control subjects), and patient awakening and parental
loss of sleep improved significantly only in the intervention group
(−0.8 and −0.6 days change per 2 weeks respectively at 6 months).
However, there were no significant differences between groups in the
changes of these measures (Table  [2](#) ). Emergency room or acute
visits to a physician for asthma also did not significantly change in
either group over the study period.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Changes in Clinical Outcomes, Intervention vs. Control Group**
:::

                                                                                **Intervention, N = 28**   **Control, N = 14**                                                                                           
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------- ----------------------------- ------------- ---------------------- ---------------------------- ------------- ----------------------------------------
  **Symptoms over previous 2 weeks**                                            **Mean at baseline**       **Mean change at 6 months**   **P-value**   **Mean at baseline**   **Mean change at 6 month**   **P-value**   **P-value for differences in changes**
  Days of wheeze                                                                2.9                        −1.4                          0.03          5.1                    −4.2                         0.004         0.10
  Days had to slow down                                                         2.5                        −1.4                          0.07          1.1                    −0.4                         0.48          0.79
  Nights woke-up                                                                1.2                        −0.8                          0.04          1.9                    −1.0                         0.06          0.66
  Days limited activity from asthma                                             0.6                        −0.2                          0.99          2.0                    −1.8                         0.13          0.14
  Days parent lose sleep                                                        0.9                        −0.6                          0.01          0.9                    −0.6                         0.13          0.71
  Days missed school for asthma                                                 0.2                        −0.2                          0.38          0.4                    −0.4                         0.25          0.31
                                                                                Baseline N(%)              6-Month N (%)                 p-value       Baseline N(%)          6-Month N (%)                P-value       P-value for differences in changes
  Acute asthma-related PCP or ER visit in prior 2 months                        5 (19.2)                   1 (3.9)                       0.18          1 (7.1)                1 (7.1)                      0.99          0.64
  **Primary controller compliance (%)**                                         Mean at baseline           Mean Change at 6 months       P-value       Mean at baseline       Mean Change at 6 month       P-value       P-value for differences in changes
  All subjects (I = 21, C = 9)                                                  38.0                       +11.2                         0.30          45.9                   −4.4                         0.81          0.46
  High risk subjects\* (I = 15, C = 8)                                          16.3                       +29.8                         0.01          39.2                   −5.0                         0.81          0.10
  **Asthma Knowledge**                                                          Baseline N(%)              6-Month N (%)                 P-value       Baseline N(%)          6-Month N (%)                P-value       P-value for differences in changes
  Correctly Described Purpose of Personal Controller Medicine (I = 12, C = 8)   4 (33.3)                   9 (75.0)                      0.03          4 (50.0)               3 (37.5)                     0.25          0.03

\*Those subjects with a baseline controller adherence of \<75%.
::::

Among the subgroup of subjects with low (\<75%) controller medication
adherence at baseline, controller medication adherence at 6 months
improved significantly only in the intervention group.

Knowledge of the purpose of controller medicine increased significantly
in the intervention group subset, but not in the control subset, a
statistically significant difference favoring the intervention group.

## Communication, teamwork, and messaging outcomes

The most frequent messaging activity was between patients and the asthma
nurse specialist, with less activity by the PCP (Table  [3](#) ). The
most frequent message content was encouragement of medication adherence
and website use (Table  [4](#) ), followed by discussion of asthma
educational content, discussion of asthma symptoms, or issues regarding
peak flow readings or measurement. Socializing on non-medical topics was
very common. Explicit coordination of care represented about 5% of
posting.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Summary by Sender of Private Chat Messages**
:::

  **Originator of message**   **Total \# of messages sent, N (%)**
  --------------------------- --------------------------------------
  Asthma nurse                235 (38.7)
  Asthma specialist           4 (7.0)
  PCP                         100 (16.5)
  Patient                     216 (35.6)
  BB team                     36 (5.9)
  Parent                      12 (2.0)
  Blank/None                  4 (7.0)
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Summary by Content of Message**
:::

  **Primary Message Content**                                             **Total \# of postings, N (%)**
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------
  Medication adherence encouraged or inquired by MD or RN                 82 (13.5)
  Encouraged patient to use BostonBreathes                                78 (12.9)
  Asthma education for patient                                            74 (12.2)
  Asthma symptom or Peak Flow- addressed or asked by MD/RN                68 (11.2)
  Socializing                                                             61 (10.1)
  Subject telling progress- asthma mentioned                              42 (6.9)
  Doctor/nurse providing general encouragement- positive feedback         38 (6.3)
  Team review summary                                                     29 (4.8)
  Medication adherence issue addressed by patient                         28 (4.6)
  Coordination of care                                                    21 (3.5)
  Asthma symptoms or peak flow reported by patient                        20 (3.3)
  Non asthma illness posting                                              11 (1.8)
  Socializing (doctor posting)                                            11 (1.8)
  Appointment reminder for patient or patient asked to make appointment   10 (1.7)
  Acknowledgement of a team posting by PCP or patient                     7 (1.2)
  Discussion of incentive points                                          7 (1.2)
  Issue with Peak Flow meter                                              4 (0.7)
  Blank message                                                           4 (0.7)
  Medicine dose change or medicine change discussed                       2 (0.3)
  All other                                                               10 (1.7)
::::

Subjects reported an average BB session duration of 19 minutes. They
reported strong satisfaction with BB with all domains generating mean
agreement ratings of 8.5 or higher, on a Likert scale of 0 (strongly
disagree) to 10 (strongly agree), including: the ease of use of the
website (8.4), good looking appearance (8.5), usefulness of information
(9.2), and ease of learning the system (8.5). Twenty-four percent (24%)
of subjects reported never using the website with a parent, 48% reported
sometimes doing so, and 28% reported often or always using the website
with a parent.

Results of the provider survey on experience with BB are shown in Table 
[5](#) . Providers tended toward agreement that BB provided useful
information; was easy to use; that their patients benefited from using
BB; and that the asthma specialist feedback was useful. Responses were
neutral on effectiveness of the discussion board for communication with
patients, and on average, expressed neutral to slight disagreement on
adequacy of time available to use BB, and if they had changed management
based on BB data. Open-ended comments grouped into three consistent
themes: the observation that BB improved communication with patients,
the advantages of having access to information on patient asthma status
on a more immediate, day to day, basis; and that the time commitment to
use the system was a concern.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
**Post-project Provider Attitudes Towards BostonBreathes**
:::

  **Attitude statement**                                                                                                        **Mean\*, N = 14**
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------
  BostonBreathes provided me with useful information about my patient(s) that I would not have had otherwise.                   6.5
  The BostonBreathes website was easy to use.                                                                                   6.9
  I had enough time in my schedule to use BostonBreathes.                                                                       4.6
  I changed the asthma management of my patient(s) based on data from the site.                                                 4.6
  It was easy to remember to login to BostonBreathes.                                                                           5.0
  I would recommend that other MDs use BostonBreathes for their asthma patients                                                 5.6
  BostonBreathes is best for severe asthmatics only.                                                                            5.0
  I trusted the information being entered by my patient(s).                                                                     5.7
  I believe my patient(s) benefited from using the BostonBreathes website.                                                      6.6
  I would recommend BostonBreathes for my asthmatic patients.                                                                   6.2
  The discussion board was an effective way to communicate with my patient(s).                                                  5.6
  The feedback from Asthma Specialist posted to the discussion board was useful in helping me to manage my asthma patient(s).   6.3

\*All answers rated on Likert scale 0-10 (0=Strongly Disagree to
10=Strongly Agree).
::::

On average, subjects earned \$6 (range, \$0-\$40) in incentive payments
for website use over the 6 month participation period, plus \$15.00
total in payments for completing pre and post study surveys.
