Abstract

## Background

Extending contact with participants after initial, intensive
intervention may support maintenance of weight loss and related
behaviors.

## Objective

This community-wide trial evaluated a text message (short message
service, SMS)-delivered, extended contact intervention ('Get Healthy,
Stay Healthy' (GHSH)), which followed on from a population-level,
behavioral telephone coaching program.

## Methods

This study employed a parallel, randomized controlled trial: GHSH
compared with no continued contact (standard practice). Participants
(n=228) were recruited after completing a 6-month lifestyle telephone
coaching program: mean age = 53.4 (standard deviation (SD)=12.3) years;
66.7% (152/228) female; mean body mass index (BMI) upon entering
GHSH=29.5 kg/m2 (SD = 6.0). Participants received tailored text messages
over a 6-month period. The message frequency, timing, and content of the
messages was based on participant preference, ascertained during two
tailoring telephone calls. Primary outcomes of body weight, waist
circumference, physical activity (walking, moderate, and vigorous
sessions/week), and dietary behaviors (fruit and vegetable serves/day,
cups of sweetened drinks per day, takeaway meals per week; fat, fiber
and total indices from the Fat and Fiber Behavior Questionnaire) were
assessed via self-report before (baseline) and after (6-months) extended
contact (with moderate-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) also assessed
via accelerometry).

## Results

Significant intervention effects, all favoring the intervention group,
were observed at 6-months for change in weight (-1.35 kg, 95% confidence
interval (CI): -2.24, -0.46, *P*=.003), weekly moderate physical
activity sessions (0.56 sessions/week, 95% CI: 0.15, 0.96, *P*=.008) and
accelerometer-assessed MVPA (24.16 minutes/week, 95% CI: 5.07, 43.25,
*P*=.007). Waist circumference, other physical activity outcomes and
dietary outcomes, did not differ significantly between groups.

## Conclusions

The GHSH extended care intervention led to significantly better
anthropometric and physical activity outcomes than standard practice (no
contact). This evidence is useful for scaling up the delivery of GHSH as
standard practice following the population-level telephone coaching
program.

# Results

## Participants

There were 1071 clients invited to participate in this study, of whom
300 expressed verbal interest in participating in the trial, and 228
participants consented and were randomized (228/300, 76%; [Figure
1](#)). [Table 1](#) shows the demographic characteristics of GHSH
participants (intervention, n=114; control, n=114). Upon entering the
GHSH trial, participants (152/228, 67% female) had a mean age of 53.4
(standard deviation (SD) = 12.3) years and BMI of 29.5 kg/m^2^(SD =
6.0), 34% (78/228) were overweight and 38% (87/228) were obese, 40%
(91/228) did not meet physical activity guidelines \[[28](#)\] (ie,
\<150 minutes MVPA per week), and 80% (182/228) did not consume the
recommended serves of fruit (ie, two) and/or vegetables (ie, five) per
day \[[29](#)\].The GHSH sample was not representative of all
participants completing the final GHS coaching call. Odds of being in
the GHSH trial were significantly higher than their respective
counterparts for those: aged \<60 years; not working; without a post
school qualification; self-reported diagnosis of hypertension;
self-reported diagnosis of high cholesterol; doing no vigorous activity;
and, who consume \<1 takeaway meal per week ([Multimedia Appendix
2](#)).

The overall retention rate from baseline to 6 months was 95% (216/228)
(103/114, 90% in intervention and 113/114, 99% in controls, *P*=.005).
Most intervention participants (98/114, 86%) and controls (107/114, 94%)
had full data on all outcomes at 6-month follow-up and on the baseline
and prestudy covariates examined ( *P*=.077). Missing data was
associated with: higher baseline BMI (mean ± SD for missing vs complete;

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Participation in the Get Healthy, Stay Healthy (GHSH)
trial.</figcaption>
</figure>

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Characteristics of 'Get Healthy, Stay Healthy' (GHSH) trial
participants.
:::

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  \                                     Mean (SD) or n (%)                                                             
  ------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------- -------------------- ---------------
  \                                     GHSH (n=114)^a^                                           Control (n=114)^a^   

  Health and demographics at baseline   \                                                         \                    

  \                                        Age (years)                                            55.5 (12.3)          51.2 (11.9)

  \                                        BMI (kg/m^2^)                                          29.3 (5.8)           29.6 (6.3)

  \                                        Weight (kg)                                            82.8 (19.4)          83.6 (18.9)

  \                                        Waist circumference (cm)                               98.9 (15.4)          99.6 (14.9)

  \                                        Gender (% female)                                      74 (64.9%)           78 (68.4%)

  \                                        In paid employment (% yes)                             69 (61.1%)           68 (59.6%)

  \                                        Education (% post-school qualification)                73 (64.0%)           77 (67.5%)

  \                                        Indigenous Australian (%)                              1 (0.9%)             5 (4.4%)

  \                                        SEIFA^b^(% living in most advantaged 3 quintiles)^c^   86 (75.4%)           78 (68.4%)

  \                                        Region (% living in major cities)                      71 (62.3%)           82 (71.9%)

  Physical activity at baseline         \                                                         \                    

  \                                        Accelerometer PA^d^(minutes/week)                      196.9 (144.4)        196.2 (143.6)

  \                                        Vigorous PA (sessions/week)                            1.56 (1.86)          2.33 (2.53)

  \                                        Moderate PA (sessions/week)                            1.11 (1.78)          1.60 (1.97)

  \                                        Walking PA (sessions/week)                             3.99 (3.04)          3.30 (2.44)

  Dietary behaviors at baseline         \                                                         \                    

  \                                        Vegetables (servings/day)                              3.1 (1.4)            3.4 (1.8)

  \                                        Fruit (servings/day)                                   2.0 (0.9)            2.0 (1.0)

  \                                        Sweetened drinks (cups/day)                            0.2 (0.5)            0.4 (0.9)

  \                                        Takeaway (meals/week)                                  0.5 (0.8)            0.5 (0.9)

  \                                        FFBQ Total Index (Score (1-5)                          3.3 (0.4)            3.3 (0.4)

  \                                        FFBQ Fat Index (Score (1-5)                            3.5 (0.5)            3.5 (0.5)

  \                                        FFBQ Fiber Index (Score (1-5)                          2.9 (0.5)            2.9 (0.5)

  Prior changes during GHS              \                                                         \                    

  \                                        Weight (kg)                                            −3.7 (4.0)^e^        −3.8 (4.3)^e^

  \                                        Waist circumference (cm)                               −5.5 (5.0)^e^        −6.3 (5.7)^e^

  \                                        Vigorous PA (sessions/week)                            0.5 (1.4)^e^         0.6 (1.7)^e^

  \                                        Moderate PA (sessions/week)                            0.5 (2.1)^e^         0.9 (2.2)^e^

  \                                        Walking PA (sessions/week)                             1.7 (2.7)^e^         1.1 (2.6)^e^

  \                                        Vegetables (servings/day)                              1.2 (1.5)^e^         1.2 (1.4)^e^

  \                                        Fruit (servings/day)                                   0.6 (1.2)^e^         0.7 (1.1)^e^

  \                                        Sweetened drinks (cups/day)                            −0.2 (0.6)^e^        −0.3 (1.2)^e^

  \                                        Takeaway (meals/week)                                  −0.5 (1.6)^e^        −0.5 (1.5)^e^
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

^a^Figures exclude missing data: one GHSH intervention participant
(employment, English spoken at home, referral source, accelerometer PA)
and one control participant (waist circumference, Indigenous status).

^b^Socioeconomic Indexes for Areas.

^c^Specifically the Index of Relative Socio-Economic Advantage and
Disadvantage.

^d^Physical activity.

^e^Statistically significant change during GHS ( *P*\<.05) based on
*t*-test.
::::

32.7 ± 7.3 vs 29.1 ± 5.8 kg/m^2^, *P*=.006); higher baseline weight
(90.8 ± 19.5 vs 82.3 ± 18.9 kg, *P*=.044); higher rates of Type 2
Diabetes at baseline (8/23, 34.8% vs 22/205, 10.7%, *P*=.004); higher
rates of smoking at baseline (5/23, 21.7% vs 7/205, 3.4%, *P*=.003); and
lower vegetable intake at baseline (2.5 ± 1.1 vs 3.4 ± 1.6 servings per
day, *P*=.012) ([Multimedia Appendix 3](#)). Participant's reasons for
discontinuing the intervention are shown in [Figure 1](#), with the most
common reasons being that they were too busy (4/13) or that the
intervention was not working for them (4/13).

## Anthropometric and Behavior Change Results

### Anthropometric Outcomes

Intervention participants showed significant reductions in both body
weight (−0.89 kg, 95% CI: −1.53, −0.25) and waist circumference (−1.34
cm, 95% CI: −2.31, −0.36; [Table 2](#)). Intervention group improvements
were significantly greater than controls for weight loss (−1.35 kg, 95%
CI: −2.24, −0.46, *P*=.003), but not for waist circumference ( *P*=.115;
[Table 3](#)).

### Physical Activity

The intervention group maintained their accelerometer-assessed MVPA and
self-reported vigorous activity, and changed significantly only in
self-reported walking (−0.55, 95% CI: −0.99, −0.11 sessions/week; [Table
2](#)). The control group changed significantly in moderate activity and
MVPA, which both declined (−0.68, 95% CI: −1.11, -0.26 sessions/week,
and −16.10, 95% CI −28.60, −3.61 min/week; [Table 2](#)). The
intervention group did significantly better than the control group in
moderate activity (0.56, 95% CI: 0.15, 0.96 sessions/week) and in
accelerometer-assessed MVPA (24.16, 95% CI: 5.07, 43.25 min/week; [Table
3](#)). Intervention effects for walking and vigorous activity were not
significant ([Table 3](#)).

### Dietary Behaviors

In the intervention group, small, but statistically significant
improvements in dietary outcomes were observed for the FFBQ Fiber and
Total Indices, while remaining dietary outcomes, except takeaway meals
per week, were all maintained ([Table 2](#)). By contrast, in the
control group, there were no statistically significant improvements,
only statistically significant declines in vegetable intake and fruit
intake ([Table 2](#)). Other dietary outcomes were maintained. No
significant or meaningful intervention effect for dietary outcomes was
observed.

### Sensitivity Analyses

Results from analyses using multiple imputation mostly supported the
interpretations from the main analyses ([Multimedia Appendix 4](#)),
except that due to slightly narrower CIs in the multiple imputation
analysis, the intervention group maintained takeaway meals/week (rather
than being 'inconclusive') and the intervention effect for vegetable
serves/day was 'similar' (rather than 'inconclusive'). Conclusions using
the alternative models mostly supported the main findings ([Multimedia
Appendix 5](#)) and revealed significant differences in walking (
*P*=.018). The intervention group showed a greater tendency to walk than
controls (odds ratio = 2.17, 95% CI: 0.45, 10.43, *P*=.334), but also to
report fewer walking sessions when they did walk than controls (relative
rate = 0.77, 95% CI: 0.64, 0.92, *P*=.005).

## Feasibility Results

The mean (±SD) call duration was 34 ±8 minutes for the initial tailoring
call and 18 ±8 minutes for the 12-week tailoring call. The median number
of text messages requested during the initial tailoring call and at the
12-week tailoring call were both five per fortnight
(25^th^-75^th^percentiles =3-7 texts). During the initial tailoring
call, 40% (46/111) of participants requested fortnightly goal checks for
both behavioral goals; 35% (40/111) weekly for both goals; and,
22%(25/111) weekly for one goal and fortnightly for the other goal.
Approximately one-half the participants (58/111, 52%) did not request
any real-time behavioral prompts and 35% (39/111) requested between 2-4
prompts per fortnight. Almost all (89/95, 94%) intervention participants
still enrolled at 12-weeks completed the 12-week tailoring interview.
During the 12-week tailoring call, almost all (82/89, 92%) participants
changed their preference for text message content, and 40% (36/89)
changed their preferred text message schedule. Outside of the 12-week
tailoring call, only 3% (3/90) of participants changed either of these
preferences via text. The weight goal reset text received replies from
30% (33/111) of participants at week 6 and 26% (25/95) at week 18. At
week 6, 40% (44/111) of participants reset at least one behavioral goal;
29% (28/95) did so in week 18. Intervention completers (n=90) replied to
84% of goal check texts sent in week 1 (152/180) and 69% (125/180) of
goal check texts sent in the last week.

## Acceptability Results

Most (69/99, 70%) participants rated GHSH as "useful" or "extremely
useful" in supporting their weight goal, and 75% (74/99) reported that
they were "satisfied" or "extremely satisfied" with the intervention.
Follow-up interviews with 62 intervention participants revealed that:
experience with text messaging prior to GHSH impacted on participants'
experience during the intervention; the GHSH program often exceeded
participants' expectations; and participants generally perceived the GHS
and GHSH intervention to be one program. Reasons for liking GHSH focused
on: the reminders provided by the text messages to reinforce what
participants wanted to do; maintaining accountability; and increased
awareness of behaviors in real time. The few participants who did not
like aspects of the GHSH nominated text messages being too repetitive or
automated as key reasons.

## Costs of Intervention Delivery Results

Health coach staff spent, on average, 35 minutes per participant
conducting and preparing for the initial tailoring interview and 30
minutes for the 12-week tailoring interview. Research staff spent on
average 31 minutes per participant entering tailoring data into the
software following the initial tailoring call and 15 minutes per
participant after the 12-week tailoring call. Research staff had to
manually trigger responses to 813 goal check replies not recognized by
the software (813/2071, 39%) of responses received), which took
approximately 1 minute per response. During the intervention, 8518 text
messages were sent to participants (at AU\$0.15 each) totaling AU\$1278
(averaging AU\$11.21 per participant). Overall, it cost approximately
AU\$80.00 per participant to deliver the GHSH extended contact
intervention.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Mean changes within the 'Get Healthy, Stay Healthy' (GHSH) intervention
group (I; n=104) and the control group (C; n=114)
:::

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  \                        \                                   MDI           Group   Mean Change\                 Within−group\    
                                                                                     (6 months -- baseline)^a^    interpretation   
  ------------------------ ----------------------------------- ------------- ------- ---------------------------- ---------------- --------------
  \                        \                                   \             \       Mean (95% CI)                *P*              \

  Anthropometry                                                                                                                    

  \                        Weight (kg)                         1 kg          I       − *0.89 (−1.53, −0.25)*^b^   *.007*           Improved

  \                        \                                   \             C       0.30 (−0.35, 0.95)           .357             Maintained

  \                        Waist circumference^c^(cm)          1 cm          I       − *1.34 (−2.31, −0.36)*      *.008*           Improved

  \                        \                                   \             C       −0.32 (−1.47, 0.82)          .578             Inconclusive

  Physical activity (PA)                                                                                                           

  \                        Vigorous PA (sessions/week)         0.5 session   I       0.20 (−0.10, 0.50)           .183             Maintained

  \                        \                                   \             C       −0.40 (−0.86, 0.05)          .084             Inconclusive

  \                        Moderate PA (sessions/week)         0.5 session   I       0.19 (−0.16, 0.54)           .277             Inconclusive

  \                        \                                   \             C       − *0.68 (−1.11, −0.26)*      *.002*           Worsened

  \                        Walking PA (sessions/week)          0.5 session   I       − *0.55 (−0.99, −0.11)*      *.015*           Worsened

  \                        \                                   \             C       0.31 (−0.40, 1.01)           .392             Inconclusive

  \                        Accelerometer PA^d^(minutes/week)   30 minutes    I       7.41 (−5.61, 20.44)          .265             Maintained

  \                        \                                   \             C       − *16.10 (−28.60, −3.61)*    *.012*           Worsened

  Dietary behaviors                                                                                                                

  \                        Vegetables (servings/day)           0.5 serves    I       −0.17 (−0.46, 0.12)          .237             Maintained

  \                        \                                   \             C       − *0.41 (−0.71, −0.12)*      *.006*           Worsened

  \                        Fruit (servings/day)                0.5 serves    I       −0.06 (−0.22, 0.10)          .482             Maintained

  \                        \                                   \             C       − *0.22 (−0.39,−0.05)*       *.011*           Worsened

  \                        Sweetened drinks (cups/ day)        0.25 cups     I       −0.00 (−0.08, 0.08)          .982             Maintained

  \                        \                                   \             C       −0.04 (−0.19, 0.11)          .602             Maintained

  \                        Takeaway (meals/week)               0.25 meal     I       −0.13 (−0.28, 0.02)          .379             Inconclusive

  \                        \                                   \             C       −0.06 (−0.19, 0.07)          .079             Maintained

  \                        FFBQ Total Index Score (1--5)       0.2 units     I       *0.07 (0.02, 0.12)*          *.011*           Improved

  \                        \                                   \             C       0.01 (−0.05, 0.07)           .781             Maintained

  \                        FFBQ Fat Index Score (1--5)         0.2 units     I       0.06 (−0.01, 0.13)           .082             Maintained

  \                        \                                   \             C       0.03 (−0.04, 0.11)           .368             Maintained

  \                        FFBQ Fiber IndexScore (1--5)        0.2 units     I       *0.08 (0.01, 0.16)*          *.028*           Improved

  \                        \                                   \             C       −0.03 (−0.12, 0.06)          .493             Maintained
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

^a^Mean changes estimated by paired *t*-test within completers, or by
marginal means from GEE models for daily accelerometer MVPA (which was
back-transformed from the log scale and multiplied by 7 yield
minutes/week).

^b^Italic values indicate statistical significance at P˂.05.

^c^n=103 GHSH group; n=112 control group (item missing data for waist
circumference).

^d^n=99 GHSH group; n=108 control group; some participants did not wear
the accelerometer.
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Mean differences in changes between the 'Get Healthy, Stay Healthy'
(GHSH) intervention (I; n=104) and control groups (C; n=114).
:::

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  \                        Mean difference\                  Between-group interpretation            
                           (GHSH -- control)^a^                                                      
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- ------------------------------ -------- ----------------------
  \                        Mean (95% CI)                     *P*                            \        

  Anthropometry                                                                                      

  \                        Weight (kg)                       − *1.35 (−2.25, −0.46)*^b^     *.003*   significantly better

  \                        Waist circumference^c^(cm)        −1.18 (−2.65, 0.29)            .116     inconclusive

  Physical activity (PA)                                                                             

  \                        Vigorous PA (sessions/week)^d^    0.15 (−0.34, 0.63)             .547     inconclusive

  \                        Moderate PA (sessions/week)^d^    *0.55 (0.14, 0.96)*            *.008*   significantly better

  \                        Walking PA (sessions/week)        −0.69 (−1.46, 0.08)            .077     inconclusive

  \                        Accelerometer PA (mins/week)^e^   *24.16 (5.07, 43.25)*          *.007*   significantly better

  Dietary behaviors                                                                                  

  \                        Vegetables (servings/day)         0.15 (−0.21, 0.50)             .408     inconclusive

  \                        Fruit (servings/day)^d^           0.16 (−0.05, 0.37)             .133     similar

  \                        Sweetened drinks (cups/day)       −0.05 (−0.19, 0.10)            .537     similar

  \                        Takeaways (meals/week)            0.01 (−0.15, 0.18)             .864     similar

  \                        FFBQ Total Index Score (1--5)     0.05 (−0.03,0.13)              .195     similar

  \                        FFBQ Fat Index Score (1--5)       0.02 (−0.07, 0.12)             .615     similar

  \                        FFBQ Fiber Index Score (1--5)     0.08 (−0.03, 0.19)             .147     similar
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

^a^Mean difference (β) with 95% CI, and *P*value from linear regression
models, adjusted for baseline values of the outcome and confounders
(listed in [Multimedia Appendix 1](#)).

^b^Italic values indicate statistical significance at P˂.05.

^c^n=102 GHSH group; n=112 control group (item missing data for waist
circumference).

^d^n=103 GHSH group; n=114 control group (item missing data for vigorous
PA, moderate PA and Fruit).

^e^Estimated using marginal means from GEE models of log-transformed
daily MVPA (repeated term for "day"), adjusting for confounders, and
correcting for regression to the mean using the method \[[37](#)\] of
including the term for assessment (pre/post) and the assessment x group
interaction, but not the conditional term for group. Estimates were
back-transformed to the original scale, then multiplied by 7 to yield
minutes per week. n=112 GHSH group; n=114 control group (all
participants with data at either time point examined).
::::
