Abstract

## Background:

The radical surgical procedures are associated with perioperative blood
loss. This study was aimed to evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety
of tranexamic acid in reducing perioperative blood loss in patients
undergoing radical surgery.

## Materials and Methods:

Sixty ASA class I and II adult consented female patients, scheduled for
elective radical surgery and met the inclusion criterion, were blindly
randomized into two groups to receive either intravenous 1 g tranexamic
acid 20 min before skin incision or an equivalent volume of normal
saline as placebo (P). All patient\'s total blood loss was measured and
recorded perioperatively at the 12^th^h postoperatively. The
preoperative and postoperative hemoglobin, hematocrit values, serum
creatinine, activated thromboplastin time, prothombin time, thrombocyte
count, fibrinogen, D-dimer, and symptoms of pulmonary embolism were
comparatively evaluated.

## Results:

The tranexamic acid significantly reduced the quantity of total blood
loss, 576 ± 53 mL in study group as compared to 823 ± 74 mL in the
control group (*P*\<0.01). Postoperatively hematocrit values were higher
in the tranexamic acid group. The coagulation profile did not differ
between the groups, but D-dimer concentrations were increased in the
control group. No complications or adverse effects were reported in the
either group.

## Conclusion:

The prophylactic administration of tranexamic acid has effectively
reduced theblood loss and transfusion needs during radical surgery
without any adverse effects or complication of thrombosis.

# RESULTS

There was no significant difference in demographic data between groups.
No significant difference was present between groups in mean hemoglobin,
hematocrit, platelet count, fibrinogen values, and coagulation
parameters. All radical surgeries were done under general anesthesia and
standardized anesthetic technique was used for all patients of both
groups \[[Table 1](#)\].

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Demographic profile, preoperative hemoglobin and coagulation parameters
:::

![]()
::::

No significant difference was found between groups in mean hemoglobin,
hematocrit, platelet count, fibrinogen values and coagulation
parameters. The total measured blood loss (576 ± 53 mL) in tranexamic
acid group was significantly less than control group (823 ± 74 mL)
(*P*\<0.01). The need for blood transfusion was more in the control
group. Only two patients in tranexamic acid group required allogeneic
blood transfusion (Group TA 2 versus 15 of Group P) \[[Table 2](#)\].
Intraoperatively, the amount of crystalloid solution used for fluid
replacement was comparable between the groups.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Comparative values of measured blood loss, blood transfusions,
hemoglobin and coagulation profile
:::

![]()
::::

There were no clinically relevant differences in the vital signs in
patients following tranexamic acid administration and no thromboembolic
complications were detected in either group during hospitalization.
