Abstract

## Background

The aim of this study was to assess the effect of Nd:YAG laser
irradiation following casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate
(CPP-ACP) application on calcium and phosphate concentration and surface
microhardness (SMH) of enamel surface in artificial white spot lesions
of primary teeth.

## Material and Methods

Eighty teeth with artificial white spot lesions were randomly divided
into four groups: (A) distilled and deionized water, (B) Nd:YAG laser,
(C) CPP-ACP crème, & (D) CPP-ACP plus laser. SMH was measured using
Vickers diamond indenter in Vickers Hardness Number (VHN). Two samples
of each group were analyzed using scanning electron microscope (SEM).
The results were analyzed with the SPSS 17/win.

## Results

The subjects of group D demonstrated a significant increase in the
calcium and phosphate contents of enamel surface compared to those of
groups A (P \< 0.001, P \< 0.001), B (P \< 0.001, P \< 0.001) and C (P =
0.024, P = 0.04), respectively. A statistically significant difference
was seen for mean VHN between groups A and B (P = 0.002). SEM
evaluations confirmed the results.

## Conclusions

The combination of Nd:YAG laser and CPP-ACP crème could be recommended
as an effective preventive modality for remineralizing of white spot
lesions in primary teeth.

**Key words:**CPP-ACP, enamel remineralization, microhardness, Nd:YAG,
primary teeth, SEM.

# Results

-Total weight percentage of calcium, phosphate and enamel surface micro
hardness

The mean enamel VHN and total weight percentage of calcium and
phosphate, resulting from the EDX analysis of enamel surface in
treatment groups are given in [ Table 1](#).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
###### Comparison of mean values (mean ± SD) of surface microhardness, calcium weight percentage, and phosphate weight percentage in the studied groups.
:::

![]()
::::

Mean total weight percentage of calcium was higher in group D compared
to other groups ([ Table 1](#)). Also mean total weight percentage of
phosphate was higher in group D compared to other groups. The difference
in the mean values were statistically significant between groups A and D
and also between groups A and C, while the difference was not
significant between groups A and B ([ Table 1](#)).

The highest mean VHN was recorded in group C ([ Table 1](#)). The
results showed a statistically significant difference in the mean values
of VHN between groups A and B, while the difference was not significant
between groups A and other groups. Mean VHN in groups D and C were
significantly higher than that in group B; meanwhile, this difference
was not significant between groups D and C the p values are listed in [
Table 1](#).

-SEM micrograph findings

Figure [1](#)a shows a sound enamel surface from the negative control
group demonstrating relatively smooth area with frequent enamel prism
ends present on the surface. The surface presented shallow depressions
and fine porosities within these depressions. The enamel surfaces were
devoid of any surface deposits.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>a) SEM image of control group showing enamel surface. b) SEM
image of enamel surface irradiated with Nd:YAG laser showing melted
enamel (large arrow) and fine cracks (small arrow). c) SEM image of
enamel surface treated with CPP-ACP showing granular particles and
amorphous crystals (arrow). d) SEM image of enamel surface treated with
combined application of CPP-ACP and laser showing smooth and more
homogeneous lazed surface (large arrow) with a few cracks coating by
granular and globular particles and amorphous homogenous crystals (small
arrow).</figcaption>
</figure>

The SEM image of enamel irradiated with Nd:YAG laser (group B) showed an
irregular roughened surface (Fig. [1](#)b). In this group, typical
melting appearance with occasional areas of fine surface cracking,
discontinuities, coalescence of globules and holes could be observed.
The surface was peppered with cavitations and craters leading to an
irregular undulated surface. The surface did not show any of the usual
enamel prism ends seen in the control group. Numerous cracked surface
coatings covered almost the entire surface.

In the SEM image of the enamel surface treated with CPP-ACP (group C),
numerous granular particles and amorphous crystals were arranged on the
enamel surface, those crystals seemed to be homogeneous, and there was
no obvious intercrystalline space (Fig. [1](#)c).

In the CPP-ACP plus laser samples (group D), a relatively smooth, more
homogeneous surface compared to those in the groups treated with laser
and CPP-ACP alone were noted (Fig. [1](#)d). Fewer cracks were observed
on the glazed enamel surface, probably due to the application of CPP-ACP
before laser irradiation, consistent with the numerous occurrences of
granular and globular particles and amorphous homogenous crystals
arranged on the enamel surface.
