Abstract

## Background

We aimed to quantify the glycemic effects of quinine in healthy
individuals.

## Methods

We evaluated the glycemic profile in response to 4 h infusion of 500 ml
of 0.9% saline versus 5% glucose solution with and without quinine at
therapeutic dose (500 mg) in ten healthy volunteers (8 men) aged
28 ± 9 years. The order of the fourth explorations was randomly
assigned. During these explorations, we measured blood glucose every
15 min for 4 h and compared the mean and glycemic fluctuations for each
test. A resting ECG was performed before and after quinine infusion in
each participant.

## Results

The mean glycemic level during the 4-h infusion was 83 ± 5 mg/dl without
quinine versus 74 ± 5 ​​mg/dl with quinine (p \< 0.001) using saline
solute versus 92 ± 7 mg/dl without quinine versus 82 ± 5 mg/dl with
quinine (p \< 0.001) when associated with the glucose solute. In
isotonic dirty solute, quinine induces a cumulative glycemic decrease of
17.5% (p = 0.01) characterized by a nadir estimated at −26.5% at the
60th minute (65 ± 23 mg/dl), p \<0.001 followed by a gradual increase
until the 4th hour. There were no signs of hypoglycemia or significant
prolongation of the QT interval at the ECG. Overall, quinine did not
induce a significant change in blood glucose with glucose compared to
saline.

## Conclusion

The intravenous infusion of quinine at a therapeutic dose induces a
light drop in blood glucose with a significant nadir at the 60th minute
in the healthy subject without hypoglycemia. This suggests the need for
close monitoring in patients at risk of hypoglycemia such as those with
severe malaria especially during the first hour of quinine infusion.

# Results

Quinine infusions were all well tolerated. No subject reported having
symptomatic hypoglycemia or significant cardiotoxicity during or after
any test day of the study.

## Plasma glucose

The mean capillary glycemia during 4 h of infusion were 0.83 ± 0.05,
0.92 ± 0.07, 0.74 ± 0.05 and 0.82 ± 0.05 g/l on normal saline, dextrose
5%, normal saline containing quinine and dextrose 5% containing quinine
respectively. On the other hand, the matched mean venous glycemia were
0.97 ± 0.02, 0.99 ± 0.35, 0.97 ± 0.06 and 0.93 ± 0.40 g/l, respectively.
On comparing the mean capillary glucose, there was a statistically
significant difference between mean glucose levels on isotonic saline
and those on isotonic dextrose (p \< 0.001). The ratio of the area under
curve for saline and saline plus quinine infusions was 89%; thus a
decrease in blood sugar of 11% induced by quinine over 4 h. At the 60th
min, the maximum glycemic drop was observed; 26.5% for quinine in
isotonic saline and 7.6% for quinine in isotonic glucose (p \< 0.001).
There was a significant difference (p \< 0.001) between mean values
during the 4 h of saline infusion versus saline + quinine infusion as
shown in Fig. [1](#).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Mean plasma glucose concentrations during a 4 h infusion of
500 ml of saline in healthy volunteers, with a subsequent 4 h infusion
of saline with quinine 8 mg/kg body weight</figcaption>
</figure>

Concerning the 12 lead ECG done before and after the administration of
quinine in either isotonic saline or isotonic glucose, lengthening of
the QT interval was not statistically significant (p \> 0.05). None of
the healthy volunteers presented symptoms or signs of hypoglycemia
during the experimental phase.
