Abstract

## Background:

Minor oral surgical procedures are the most commonly performed
procedures by oral and maxillofacial surgeons. Performance of painless
surgical procedure is highly appreciated by the patients and is possible
through the use of local anesthesia, conscious sedation or general
anesthesia. Postoperative pain can also be controlled by the use of
opioids, as opioid receptors exist in the peripheral nervous system and
offers the possibility of providing postoperative analgesia in the
surgical patient. The present study compares the efficacy of 0.5%
bupivacaine versus 0.5% bupivacaine with 0.3 mg buprenorphine in minor
oral surgical procedures.

## Patients and Methods:

The present study was conducted in 50 patients who required minor oral
surgical procedures under local anesthesia. Two types of local
anesthetic solutions were used- 0.5% bupivacaine with 1:200000
epinephrine in group I and a mixture of 39 ml of 0.5% bupivacaine with
epinephrine 1:200000 and 1 ml of 300 μg buprenorphine (3 μg/kg)in group
II. Intraoperative and postoperative evaluation was carried out for both
the anesthetic solutions.

## Results:

The mean duration of postoperative analgesia in bupivacaine group
(508.92 ± 63.30 minutes) was quite less than the buprenorphine
combination group (1840.84 ± 819.51 minutes). The mean dose of
postoperative analgesic medication in bupivacaine group (1.64 ± 0.99
tablets) was higher than buprenorphine combination group (0.80 ± 1.08
tablets). There was no significant difference between the two groups
regarding the onset of action of the anesthetic effect and duration of
anesthesia.

## Conclusion:

Buprenorphine can be used in combination with bupivacaine for patients
undergoing minor oral surgical procedures to provide postoperative
analgesia for a longer duration.

# RESULTS

Out of total 50 patients selected for the study, there were 29 (58%)
male and 21 (42%) female \[ [Figure 1](#)\]. The mean age of patients
was 27.60 years in bupivacaine group and 27.50 years in buprenorphine
combination with bupivacaine group.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Demographic data</figcaption>
</figure>

Patients were divided into two groups and the surgical procedures
included surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molars, incision
and drainage of space infections, enucleation of cysts, dentoalveolar
fractures, isolated mandibular fractures, maxillary fractures, elective
implant removal, and excision of tumors \[ [Figure 2](#)\].

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Various minor oral surgical procedures done</figcaption>
</figure>

In both groups, the minimum volume of anesthetic solution used was 4 ml.
However, the mean volume of bupivacaine solution including the amount
needed for infiltration/reanesthesia was slightly higher (4.15 ± 0.52
ml) than the mean volume of buprenorphine combination with bupivacaine
solution (4.12 ± 0.60 ml). The difference in the mean volume of both the
solutions used was found to be statistically nonsignificant ( *P* =
0.84).

The mean subjective onset of action in bupivacaine group (3.00 ± 1.08
min) was slightly longer than buprenorphine combination group (2.92 ±
1.03 min) whereas, on pinprick test, reverse was the case with the mean
of 7.40 ± 1.93 min in buprenorphine combination group and 7.28 ± 1.59
min in bupivacaine group \[ [Table 1](#)\]. Statistically, no
significant difference was observed between both groups regarding
subjective ( *P* = 0.79) and objective onset of action ( *P* = 0.81).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Evaluation of onset of action
:::

![]()
::::

Similarly, there was no significant difference in the duration of
surgical procedure ( *P* = 0.76) and duration of anesthesia with respect
to initial recovery from anesthesia and complete recovery of sensation
in both groups ( *P* = 0.32, *P* = 0.63, respectively). However, the
mean duration of postoperative analgesia in bupivacaine group (508.92 ±
63.30 min) was observed to be quite less than buprenorphine combination
group (1840.84 ± 819.51 min), and value was found to be highly
significant statistically ( *P* \< 0.001) \[ [Table 2](#)\].

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Evaluation of duration of anesthesia, postoperative analgesia, and
duration of surgery
:::

![]()
::::

On comparing the total amount of analgesic medication ingested during
the postoperative period, the mean dose of analgesic medication in
bupivacaine group (1.64 ± 0.99 tablets) was observed to be higher than
buprenorphine combination group (0.80 ± 1.08 tablets). The difference
between both the anesthetic solutions regarding number of analgesic
tablets was found to be statistically significant ( *P* = 0.006) \[
[Table 3](#)\].

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Evaluation of analgesic medication
:::

![]()
::::

The percentage of patients who had taken analgesic medication in the
early postoperative period (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 h) and in
the later postoperative period (12, 24, 36 and 48 h) was compared in
both the groups, and it revealed that the patients in buprenorphine
combination group had significantly less pain during both periods \[
[Figure 3](#)\]. At the end of 10 h, all patients (100%) in
buprenorphine combination group were pain free, as compared to only 4%
of patients who were absolutely pain free in bupivacaine group. In this
group, 12% of patients had mild pain but did not take analgesic
medication. Only 84% of patients took analgesic medication till the 10
^th^ h evaluation. However, at 12, 24, and 36 h, 4%, 12%, and 16% of
patients, respectively, in buprenorphine combination group had taken
analgesic medication as compared to 100% of patients in bupivacaine
group at all-time intervals. At the 48 ^th^ h, 20% of patients were
still pain free in buprenorphine combination group as compared to no
pain-free patient in bupivacaine group.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Patients who had taken analgesic medication</figcaption>
</figure>

The difference between number of analgesic tablets taken in both groups
was statistically highly significant at the 10 ^th^, 12 ^th^, 24 ^th^,
36 ^th^, and 48 ^th^ h ( *P* \< 0.001) \[ [Table 4](#)\].

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Percentage of patients who had taken analgesic medication
:::

![]()
::::

The efficacy of postoperative analgesia was recorded with the help of
100 mm-length VAS in both the groups \[ [Figure 4](#)\]. Till the 5 ^th^
postoperative hour, the *P* value was found to be statistically
insignificant as all the patients in buprenorphine combination group had
no pain and only three patients in bupivacaine group had very mild pain.
Difference in median postoperative pain score between both anesthetic
solutions was found to be statistically significant at the 6 ^th^ and 10
^th^ h ( *P* = 0.001). However, it was observed to be statistically
highly significant from 7 ^th^ h to 9 ^th^ h ( *P* \< 0.001). As all the
patients in the bupivacaine group had taken analgesic medication by the
12 ^th^ h, they were excluded from further statistical analysis \[
[Table 5](#)\].

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Evaluation of pain using visual analog scale</figcaption>
</figure>

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Evaluation of pain using visual analog scale
:::

![]()
::::

None of the patients in either group reported opioid-related side
effects such as nausea, vomiting, pruritus, or any evidence of
respiratory depression during intraoperative and postoperative
assessment.
