Abstract

## Background:

Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block has been used to provide intra-
and post-operative analgesia with single incision laparoscopic (SIL)
bariatric and gynecological surgery with mixed results. Its efficacy in
providing analgesia for SIL cholecystectomy (SILC) via the same approach
remains unexplored.

## Aims:

The primary objective of our study was to compare the efficacy of
bilateral TAP block with local anesthetic infiltration for perioperative
analgesia in patients undergoing SILC.

## Settings and Design:

This was a prospective, randomized, controlled, double-blinded trial
performed in a tertiary care hospital.

## Materials and Methods:

Forty-two patients undergoing SILC were randomized to receive either
ultrasound-guided (USG) bilateral mid-axillary TAP blocks with 0.375%
ropivacaine or local anesthetic infiltration of the port site. The
primary outcome measure was the requirement of morphine in the first 24
h postoperatively.

## Statistical Analysis:

The data were analyzed using *t*-test, Mann--Whitney test or Chi-square
test.

## Results:

The 24 h morphine requirement (mean ± standard deviation) was 34.57 ±
14.64 mg in TAP group and 32.76 ± 14.34 mg in local infiltration group
(*P* = 0.688). The number of patients requiring intraoperative
supplemental fentanyl in TAP group was 8 and in local infiltration group
was 16 (*P* = 0.028). The visual analog scale scores at rest and on
coughing were significantly higher in the local infiltration group in
the immediate postoperative period (*P* = 0.034 and *P* = 0.007,
respectively).

## Conclusion:

USG bilateral TAP blocks were not effective in decreasing 24 h morphine
requirement as compared to local anesthetic infiltration in patients
undergoing SILC although it provided some analgesic benefit
intraoperatively and in the initial 4 h postoperatively. Hence, the
benefits of TAP blocks are not worth the effort and time spent for
administering them for this surgery.

# RESULTS

Flow of patients is given in [Figure 2](#).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Flow of patients in the study</figcaption>
</figure>

The demographic parameters were similar among the two study groups
\[[Table 1](#)\].

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Demographic data of patients in the two groups
:::

![]()
::::

The number of patients requiring intraoperative supplemental fentanyl in
the TAP group was 8 and in the control group was 16 (*P* = 0.028\*). The
supplemental dosing of fentanyl (median \[minimum--maximum\]) in the TAP
group was 0 µg (0--120) and in the control group was 30 µg (0--120) (*P*
= 0.013\*). The total 24 h morphine requirement (mean ± SD) was 34.57 ±
14.64 mg in TAP group and 32.76 ± 14.34 mg in control group (*P* =
0.688). The time to first analgesic demand via the PCA device was
similar in both groups (35 min \[10--130\] in TAP group vs. 40 min
\[15--230\] in control group \[median (minimum--maximum)\]; *P* =
0.369). Postoperative VAS scores were significantly more in control
group at shifting \[[Table 2](#)\]. At 4 h, none of the patients in the
TAP group but seven patients (33.3%) in the control group had moderate
to severe pain (VAS \>3) at rest (*P* = 0.009\*). At 4 h, eight patients
(38.1%) in the TAP group and 15 patients (71.4%) in the control group
had moderate to severe pain on coughing (*P* = 0.03\*). At 12 h, six
patients (28.5%) in the TAP group and 18 patients (85.7%) in the control
group had moderate to severe pain on coughing (*P* \< 0.001\*).
Proportion of patients having moderate to severe pain was not
significantly different at other time points. Number of patients with
sedation scores \>1 in the two groups were similar at all-time points.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Visual analogue scale score at rest and on coughing in the two groups
(median (minimum-maximum))
:::

![]()
::::
