Abstract

## Aims

This post hoc assessment evaluated the efficacy and safety of
once‐daily, prandial glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonist
lixisenatide in patients with type 2 diabetes ( T2D ) and normal renal
function (estimated glomerular filtration rate ≥90  mL /min), or mild
(60‐89  mL /min) or moderate (30‐59  mL /min) renal impairment.

## Methods

Patients from 9 lixisenatide trials in the GetGoal clinical trial
programme were categorized by baseline creatinine clearance: normal
renal function (lixisenatide n = 2094, placebo n = 1150); renal
impairment (mild: lixisenatide n = 637, placebo n = 414; moderate:
lixisenatide n = 122, placebo n = 68). Meta‐analyses of placebo‐adjusted
mean differences between baseline renal categories were performed for
efficacy and safety outcomes.

## Results

HbA1c, 2‐hour postprandial plasma glucose and fasting plasma glucose
were comparably reduced in lixisenatide‐treated patients with normal
renal function, and mild and moderate renal impairment. The most common
adverse events ( AEs ) in all renal function categories were
gastrointestinal ( GI ), predominantly nausea and vomiting. A 14% higher
incidence of GI AEs and a 10% higher incidence of nausea and vomiting
were seen with mild impairment vs normal function ( P= .003 for both),
but no significant differences were observed between the mild and
moderate impairment categories ( P= .99 and P= .57, respectively), or
between the moderate impairment and normal categories ( P= .16 and
P= .65, respectively). Additionally, the incidence of hypoglycaemia was
similar in all categories.

## Conclusions

This study demonstrates that baseline renal status does not affect
efficacy outcomes in lixisenatide‐ vs placebo‐treated patients, and that
no lixisenatide dose adjustment is required for patients with T2D with
mild or moderate renal impairment.

# RESULTS

## Patient demographics and clinical characteristics at baseline

The distribution of patients in the combined safety population by renal
function category and a summary of patient characteristics at baseline
is given in Table [2](#) .

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline demographics by treatment (safety population)
:::

  Characteristic                          Placebo         Lixisenatide
  --------------------------------------- --------------- --------------
  ( *N* = 1639)                           ( *N* = 2869)   
  *n*(%)                                  *n*(%)          
  Sex                                                     
  Male                                    811 (49.5)      1362 (47.5)
  Female                                  828 (50.5)      1507 (52.5)
  Age                                                     
  \<65 years                              1286 (78.5)     2352 (82.0)
  ≥65 years                               353 (21.5)      517 (18.0)
  \<75 years                              1600 (97.6)     2805 (97.8)
  ≥75 years                               39 (2.4)        64 (2.2)
  Race                                                    
  White                                   973 (59.4)      1898 (66.2)
  Black                                   43 (2.6)        73 (2.5)
  Asian/Oriental                          601 (36.7)      843 (29.4)
  Other                                   22 (1.3)        55 (1.9)
  HbA1c [a](#)                                            
  \<8%                                    744 (45.4)      1277 (44.5)
  ≥8%                                     895 (54.6)      1592 (55.5)
  Body mass index [b](#)                                  
  \<30 kg/m ^2^                           832 (50.8)      1376 (48.0)
  ≥30 kg/m ^2^                            807 (49.2)      1493 (52.0)
  Renal function category                                 
  Total                                   1636            2853
  NormalCC ≥90 mL/min                     1150 (70.3)     2094 (73.4)
  Mild impairmentCC 60 to 89 mL/min       414 (25.3)      637 (22.3)
  Moderate impairmentCC 30 to 59 mL/min   68 (4.2)        122 (4.3)
  Severe impairmentCC \<30 mL/min         4 (0.2)         0 (0.0)

Abbreviations: CC , creatinine clearance; HbA1c , glycated haemoglobin.

Only patients with assessment were included for any particular variable.

Screening.

Baseline.
::::

The combined safety population from the nine GetGoal trials included in
this analysis comprised 2869 patients who received lixisenatide and 1639
patients who received placebo; the mITT population comprised 2720
patients and 1577 patients who received lixisenatide and placebo,
respectively. Within the safety population, 3244 patients were
classified as having normal renal function, 1051 patients had a mild
renal impairment and 190 patients a moderate renal impairment. No
patient had severe renal impairment at baseline in the lixisenatide
group.

The majority of patients were white and \<65 years old, with
approximately half of the patients having HbA1c ≥8% (64 mmol/mol) at
baseline (Table [2](#) ). Baseline rates of microalbuminuria, an
indicator of diabetic nephropathy, were generally low and similar across
all studies and both treatment arms included in the analysis ( *P* = .80
for heterogeneity).

## Comparisons of changes in efficacy variables from baseline to study end within baseline renal function categories

Of the five efficacy variables evaluated in this analysis,
placebo‐adjusted mean differences in HbA1c, 2‐hour PPG and FPG were
significantly lower at study end in lixisenatide‐ than in
placebo‐treated patients in all three renal function categories (Table
[3](#) ).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Efficacy of lixisenatide compared with placebo by renal function
category ( mITT population)
:::

  Endpoint placebo‐adjusted mean difference   Normal                 Mild impairment        Moderate impairment
  ------------------------------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- -----------------------
  CC ≥90 mL/min                               CC 60‐89 mL/min        CC 30‐59 mL/min        
  HbA1c (%)                                   −0.52 (−0.65, −0.39)   −0.50 (−0.68, −0.31)   −0.85 (−1.09, −0.61)
                                              *P*\< .00001           *P*\< .00001           *P*\< .00001
  2‐hour PPG (mmol/L)                         −4.78 (−5.90, −3.66)   −5.08 (−6.58, −3.58)   −6.81 (−10.81, −2.82)
                                              *P*\< .00001           *P*\< .00001           *P*\< .001
  FPG (mmol/L)                                −0.70 (−0.91, −0.50)   −0.48 (−0.74, −0.22)   −0.78 (−1.36, −0.20)
                                              *P*\< .00001           *P*\< .001             *P*\< .01
  Basal insulin dose (U)                      −2.53 (−3.84, −1.21)   −1.79 (−2.76, −0.83)   −0.70 (−2.22, 0.81)
                                              *P*\< .001             *P*\< .001             NS
  Weight (kg)                                 −0.64 (−0.93, −0.34)   −0.59 (−0.90, −0.28)   −0.47 (−1.37, 0.42)
                                              *P*\< .0001            *P*\< .001             NS

Abbreviations: CC , creatinine clearance; FPG , fasting plasma glucose;
HbA1c , glycated haemoglobin; NS , not significant; PPG , postprandial
plasma glucose.

All data are presented as mean (95% CI ).
::::

Basal insulin dose data were retrieved from three GetGoal trials (Table
[S2](#) ). In both the normal renal function and the mild impairment
categories, end‐of‐treatment basal insulin dose was significantly lower
with lixisenatide than with placebo. However, in the moderate renal
impairment category there was no significant difference between
lixisenatide and placebo in basal insulin dose.

End‐of‐treatment body weight was significantly lower compared with
baseline in both the normal renal function and the mild impairment
categories. Body weight loss was also observed in the moderate renal
impairment category, but this did not reach statistical significance.

## Meta‐analysis of changes in efficacy variables between renal function categories

Comparisons of normal vs mild renal function and mild vs moderate renal
function were performed to examine the incremental effect of increasing
renal impairment on efficacy measures, while the direct comparison of
normal vs moderate renal function demonstrates the cumulative effect.

When between‐category changes for normal vs mild renal impairment and
mild vs moderate renal impairment were assessed across the studies,
there was no significant difference in HbA1c reductions at study end for
patients with normal renal function vs those with mild renal impairment
( *P* = .58), between patients with mild and moderate renal impairment (
*P* = .36), or between patients with normal and moderate renal
impairment ( *P* = .20; Figure [1](#) a).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Placebo‐adjusted meta‐analysis of change in A , HbA1c ; B ,
2‐hour PPG and C, FPG from baseline to week 24 (week 12 for GetGoal‐Mono
) between renal function categories in patients receiving lixisenatide.
Normal renal function: eGFR  ≥90 mL/min; mild impairment: eGFR
60‐89 mL/min; moderate impairment: eGFR 30‐59 mL/min. CI , confidence
interval; eGFR , estimated glomerular filtration rate; FPG , fasting
plasma glucose; HbA1c , glycated haemoglobin; PPG , postprandial plasma
glucose</figcaption>
</figure>

No difference was observed in placebo‐adjusted change in 2‐hour PPG at
week 24 between patients with normal function compared with those with
mild renal impairment ( *P* = .72), between patients with mild and
moderate renal impairment ( *P* = .59), or between patients with normal
function and those with moderate renal impairment ( *P* = .70; Figure
[1](#) b).

Similarly, the difference in placebo‐adjusted FPG reductions from
baseline was not significant for patients with normal renal function vs
those with mild renal impairment ( *P* = .12), between patients with
mild and moderate renal impairment ( *P* = .37), or between patients
with normal function and those with moderate renal impairment ( *P*
= .55; Figure [1](#) c).

Data for these three subgroup analyses, demonstrating the cumulative
effect of increasing renal impairment (i.e. the normal vs moderate renal
function comparisons) in each original study population can be seen in
Figure [S1](#) .

There was no significant placebo‐adjusted difference in insulin dose
change from baseline between the normal renal function and the mild
impairment categories \[−0.82 U; 95% confidence interval (CI) −2.65,
1.03; *P* = .39\], or between the mild and moderate renal impairment
categories (−3.20 U; 95% CI −8.31, 1.92; *P* = .22).

Finally, no significant difference was seen in placebo‐adjusted body
weight change from baseline between the normal renal function and the
mild impairment categories (−0.05 kg; 95% CI −0.47, 0.38; *P* = .82), or
between the mild and moderate renal impairment categories (−0.19 kg; 95%
CI −1.11, 0.73; *P* = .69).

## Meta‐analysis of safety outcomes

Adverse events were analysed using SOCs that were identified across all
of the renal function categories. There were 14 SOCs that met this
criterion: gastrointestinal (GI) disorders; nervous system disorders;
general disorders and administration‐site conditions; musculoskeletal
and connective tissue disorders; skin and subcutaneous tissues
disorders; metabolism and nutrition disorders; psychiatric disorders;
cardiac disorders; injury, poisoning and procedural disorders; renal and
urinary disorders; eye disorder investigations; respiratory, thoracic
and mediastinal disorders; and infections and infestations. There were
no significant differences between the normal and mild impairment or
between the normal and moderate impairment renal function categories,
with the exception of the GI disorders and metabolism and nutrition
disorders (Table [4](#) ). The most common AEs in all renal function
categories were GI‐related, predominantly nausea and vomiting.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Placebo‐adjusted meta‐analysis (fixed effect) of selected AE s [a](#)
between renal function categories (safety population)
:::

  Parameter                                  Normal vs mild   Mild vs moderate   Normal vs moderate                          
  ------------------------------------------ ---------------- ------------------ -------------------- ---------- ----------- -----
  Estimate                                   *P*‐value        Estimate           *P*‐value            Estimate   *P*‐value   
  GI disorders (SOC)                         −0.14            .003               0.00                 .99        −0.10       .16
  Nausea/vomiting (HLT)                      −0.1             .003               0.04                 .57        −0.03       .65
  Metabolism and nutrition disorders (SOC)   −0.08            .005               0.15                 .03        0.11        .09
  Hypoglycaemia (HLT)                        −0.02            .26                0.04                 .53        0.03        .63
  Appetite disorders (HLT)                   −0.03            .009               0.01                 .79        −0.03       .47
  Decreased appetite (PT)                    −0.03            .004               0.03                 .47        −0.02       .63

Abbreviations: GI , gastrointestinal; HLT , higher level term; PT ,
preferred term; SOC , system and organ class ( MedDRA ).

Fourteen SOC s were identified as common for all three renal impairment
categories. Those showing significant placebo‐adjusted risk differences
are shown here.
::::

There was a lower incidence of any GI disorder AE (SOC), and a lower
incidence of nausea and vomiting (HLT), in the normal renal function vs
mild renal impairment category ( *P* = .003 for both), but no difference
was found for either of these endpoints between the mild and moderate
impairment categories ( *P* = .99 and *P* = .57, respectively), or
between the moderate impairment and normal categories ( *P* = .16 and
*P* = .65, respectively). The incidences of any metabolism/nutrition
disorder AE (SOC) and of decreased appetite (HLT) were significantly
lower in the normal function vs the mild impairment category ( *P*
= .005 and *P* = .004, respectively). The difference in the incidence of
any metabolism/nutrition disorder AE between the mild and moderate renal
impairment categories was also significant ( *P* = .03), but no other
significant difference between renal function groups was found for
either of these safety endpoints (Table [4](#) ).

Importantly, with respect to hypoglycaemia, there was no significant
placebo‐adjusted difference in the incidence rate between the normal
renal function and the mild impairment categories (−0.02; 95% CI −0.06,
0.02; *P* = .26), between the mild and the moderate renal impairment
categories (0.04; 95% CI −0.08, 0.15; *P* = .53), or between the normal
renal function and the moderate impairment categories (−0.03; 95% CI
−0.08, 0.14).

No significant difference was reported for placebo‐adjusted change from
baseline in heart rate between the normal renal function and the mild
impairment categories \[−1.13 beats per min (bpm); 95% CI −2.54, 0.28;
*P* = .12\], or between the mild and moderate renal impairment
categories (1.73 bpm; 95% CI −2.72, 6.17; *P* = .45). Similarly, there
was no significant placebo‐adjusted difference between the change from
baseline in systolic blood pressure (SBP) in the normal renal function
and mild impairment categories (−0.99 mm Hg; 95% CI −3.82, 1.84; *P*
= .49), or between the mild and moderate renal impairment categories
(−7.41 mm Hg; 95% CI −16.30, 1.47; *P* = .10). Although there was no
significant placebo‐adjusted difference between the change from baseline
in diastolic blood pressure (DBP) in the normal renal function and mild
impairment categories (−0.18 mm Hg; 95% CI −1.56, 1.20; *P* = .80), a
significant difference was seen between the mild and moderate renal
impairment categories (−5.11 mm Hg; 95% CI −8.93, −1.29; *P*  \< .01).
