Abstract

## Background

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is the most common chronic inflammatory skin
disease in infancy with a complex pathology. In adults, the clinical
severity of AD has been associated with increases in T helper cell type
(Th) 2, Th22, and Th17 serum markers, including high levels of CC
chemokine ligand (CCL) 17 and CCL22 chemokines.

## Objective

To explore the possible association between serum chemokine levels and
AD severity in infants with moderate-to-severe AD and elevated
immunoglobulin E (IgE).

## Subjects and methods

Serum samples ( *n* = 41) obtained from a randomized, double-blind, and
clinical dietary intervention study were used to study biomarkers in
infants with AD. Baseline- and post-intervention samples (4 months) were
used, six chemokines and nine ratios thereof were analyzed using Luminex
and correlated to AD severity. In the initial study, the infants were
randomized to receive extensively hydrolyzed whey-based formula without
(control) or with short-chain galacto-oligosaccharides/long-chain
fructo-oligosaccharides (9:1) and *Bifidobacterium breve* M-16V
(active).

## Results

31 Infants up to 11 months of age, with an objective-SCORAD score
(oSCORAD) ≥ 20 and elevated total-IgE and/or specific-IgE levels were
included. In time, the median oSCORAD decreased in both groups by −8
(control, *p*  \< 0.05; active, *p*  \< 0.01). Irrespective of dietary
intervention, several changes in Th2 chemokines (CCL17 and CCL22),
inflammatory chemokine (CCL20), and the Th1 chemokine, CXC chemokine
ligand (CXCL) 9, were detected over time. Overall CCL17 correlated to
oSCORAD ( *r* = 0.446, *p*  \< 0.01). After 4 months of dietary
intervention, CXCL9 was higher ( *p*  \< 0.01) in the active group
compared with control \[active, 2.33 (1.99--2.89); controls, 1.95
(1.77--2.43) log 10 median (range)\]. In addition, a reduction in
Th2/Th1 chemokine ratios for CCL17/CXCL9, CCL22/CXCL9, CCL20/CXCL10, and
CCL20/CXCL11 was detected associated with the active intervention.

## Conclusion

While this study is small and exploratory in nature, these data
contribute to immune biomarker profiling and understanding of AD in
infants.

# Results

## Infant Characteristics

Overall, 53 infants with moderate-to-severe AD were screened. Of these,
31 infants had elevated IgE levels and were therefore considered
eligible for randomization. In total, 26 infants completed the study
(Figure [1](#) ). Baseline characteristics ( *n* = 31) are shown in
Table [1](#) .

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Flowchart of study inclusion and exclusion.</figcaption>
</figure>

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline characteristics of the clinical study ( *n* = 31).
:::

  Characteristic                                                      Control group ( *n* = 15)   Active group ( *n* = 16)   *p*Values
  ------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- -------------------------- -----------
  Male, *n* (%)                                                       9 (60.0)                    11 (68.8)                  0.72
  Age (months)                                                                                                               
  Mean (±SD)                                                          6.5 (1.8)                   7.4 (2.4)                  
  Median (Q1--Q3)                                                     6 (6--7)                    8 (6--10)                  0.15
  Range                                                               4--10                       2--11                      
  Ethnicity, *n* (%)                                                                                                         0.82
   Caucasian/White                                                    11 (73.3)                   13 (81.25)                 
   African/Black                                                      1 (6.7)                     0                          
   Asian                                                              1 (6.7)                     0                          
   Combination of above or other                                      2 (13.3)                    3 (13.3)                   
  Gestational age (mean ± SD, weeks)                                  39.8 (1.2)                  39.4 (1.8)                 0.71
  Birth weight (mean ± SD, g)                                         3,538.0 (428.6)             3,820.3 (718.2)            0.14
  Delivery by cesarean section, *n* (%)                               1 (6.7)                     3 (18.8)                   0.60
  Length-for-age (mean ± SD, *z* -scores)                             −0.4667 (0.9155)            0.3125 (0.9465)            **0.02**
  Weight-for-age (mean ± SD, *z* -scores)                             −0.5333 (0.7432)            0.125 (0.8062)             **0.03**
  Head circumference-for-age (mean ± SD, *z* -scores)                 −0.2143 (1.369)             0.0625 (0.7719)            0.32
  Started with breastfeeding, *n*                                     13                          14                         
  Duration of exclusive breast feeding (mean ± SD, months)            1.5 (2.1)                   3.0 (3.1)                  0.14
  Time of first introduction cow's milk protein (mean ± SD, months)   1.5 (2.1)                   3.9 (4.3)                  0.10
  Time of first solid food introduction (mean ± SD, months)           5.3 (1.1)                   5.2 (1.2)                  0.86
  oSCORAD score (mean ± SD)                                           26.53 (4.307)               24.94 (5.221)              0.22
  Any topical corticosteroid used                                                                                            
  Yes, *n* (%)                                                        14 (93.3)                   15 (93.8)                  1.00
  Hydrocortisone acetate 1%, *n*                                      12                          14                         0.65
  Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%, *n*                                   5                           4                          0.70
  Mometasone furoate 0.1%, *n*                                        1                           2                          1.00
  Total immunoglobulin E (IgE)                                                                                               
  log 10 Mean (SD)                                                    1.761 (0.4890)              1.562 (0.3508)             0.11
  Total IgE log 10 min--max                                           1.000--2.963                0.8451--2.332              
  Sensitization to aero-allergens                                     0.24                                                   
  Negative, *n* (%)                                                   7 (46.7)                    11 (68.8)                  
  Positive, *n* (%)                                                   6 (40.0)                    3 (18.8)                   
  Missing, *n* (%)                                                    2 (13.3)                    2 (12.5)                   
  Sensitization to food allergens                                     0.65                                                   
  Negative, *n* (%)                                                   3 (20.0)                    2 (12.5)                   
  Positive, *n* (%)                                                   12 (80.0)                   14 (87.5)                  
  Parental allergies: at least 1 positive allergic manifestations                                                            
  Mother (total 31), *n* (%)                                          6 (40)                      6 (37.5)                   1.00
  Father (total 26), *n* (%)                                          7 (58.3)                    7 (50)                     0.71
  Siblings in household (blood related)                                                                                      
   None                                                               10 (66.7)                   9 (56.3)                   0.72
   1                                                                  2 (13.3)                    5 (31.3)                   0.39
   2 or more                                                          3 (20)                      2 (12.6)                   0.65
  Day care attendance \[yes, *n* (%)\]                                11 (73.3)                   12 (75.0)                  1.00
  Exposure to smoking in household \[yes, *n* (%)\]                   5 (33.3)                    4 (25.0)                   0.70
::::

The infants were well balanced over the study groups with respect to the
baseline characteristics; only significant differences for length and
weight were observed; infants in the control group were smaller in
respect to length, weight. At baseline, the length-for-age *z* -scores
for infants in the control group were significantly lower ( *p*
 \< 0.05) than the active group \[mean (SD) −0.4667 (0.9155) versus
0.3125 (0.9465), respectively\]. The weight-for-age *z* -scores were
also significantly lower ( *p*  \< 0.05) in the control group than the
active group with a mean (SD) of −0.5333 (0.7432) and 0.125 (0.8062),
respectively.

Atopic dermatitis severity was classified as moderate-to-severe with a
median oSCORAD of 23 (Q1--Q3 = 21--27). All infants were born at term
with a median gestational age of 39 weeks, and only 12.9% of the infants
were born *via* cesarean section. The mean age of infants at the time of
inclusion was 7 months (median 6, range 2--11 months). The male/female
ratio was approximately 2:1 in both study groups. The majority (80%) of
infants were of Caucasian descent. At baseline, total IgE was comparable
in both groups. In addition, 83.9% of the infants were sensitized to at
least one food allergen; 29% to at least one aero-allergen, which was
comparable in both groups. For all infants, topical corticosteroids were
prescribed before screening for this study. The topical corticosteroids
were used in 93.5% of the infants for a mean (SD) of 124.6 (73.1) days
before start of dietary intervention. Topical corticosteroid use was
evenly distributed between the study groups, with a median (Q1--Q3) of
135 (67--150) days of topical steroid use in the control group and 113
(65--182) days in the active group, with no significant differences
observed.

Low potency topical corticosteroids (hydrocortisone acetate 1%) were
most commonly used (83.9%) compared with moderate potency triamcinolone
acetonide 0.1% (29%) and high potency mometasone furoate 0.1% (9.7%).

The median \[interquartile range (Q1--Q3)\] for exclusive breastfeeding
before study enrollment was 0 (0--3) months in the control group and 3
(0--6) months in the active group, but this was not significantly
different. Cows' milk protein was introduced at a median (Q1--Q3) of 0
(0--3) months and 3 (0--6) months in the control and active groups,
respectively, ( *p*  \> 0.05). Complementary feeding was first
introduced at a median (Q1--Q3) of 5 (4--6) months among all infants.

## Effect on Severity of AD

At baseline, oSCORAD between the study groups was comparable, with a
median (Q1--Q3) oSCORAD in the control group of 24 (21--27) and 21
(20--26) in the active group. After 4 months of dietary intervention,
the average oSCORAD decreased in those infants ( *n* = 26) who completed
the study. The median change in both groups of −8, resulted in a median
(Q1--Q3) post-intervention oSCORAD of 17 (12--21) in the control group
and 13 (12--17) in the active group.

Interestingly, only four out of thirteen (31%) infants in the active
group retained an oSCORAD above 15 (moderate AD) compared with eight out
of thirteen (62%) infants in the control group. AD exacerbations
occurred in 8 out of 26 infants (4 in both groups 30.8%) during dietary
intervention period. The use of topical steroids during the dietary
intervention period appears similar in both groups ( *p*  \> 0.05) with
a median (Q1--Q3) topical steroid use of 118.5 (113.5--120.8) days in
the control group and 117.0 (113.0--121.5) days in the active group.

## Exploratory Immune Profiles in AD

In total, 41 serum samples obtained from the clinical study were used
for exploring the biomarker profiles of infants with moderate to severe
AD and elevated IgE levels. For these infants from which serum samples
were obtained, reduction of oSCORAD at baseline and after 4 months of
dietary intervention is shown in (Figure [2](#) ). Non-parametric
analyses were performed and indicated within the figures. Small sample
sizes are in general a good argument to use non-parametric statistics,
as possible skewness in the data may not be revealed. Additional
parametric analysis using ordinary one-way ANOVA was performed, to show
robustness of the data. The analysis indicated no differences between
the groups at baseline and confirmed the significant decline within
control ( *p*  \< 0.001) as well as within active ( *p*  \< 0.0001) of
oSCORAD, which support the non-parametric analysis.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Reduction of atopic dermatitis severity over time.
Individual oSCORAD of the control (open dots) and active (closed
triangles) groups at baseline and after 4 months of dietary
intervention, for infants from which serum samples were available (
<em>n</em> = 41). Line represents median ± interquartile range.
Significant differences within the groups are depicted with asterisks
(non-paired W-test, * <em>p</em>  &lt; 0.05, ** <em>p</em>
 &lt; 0.01).</figcaption>
</figure>

Several chemokines were measured in serum at baseline and at the end of
intervention and correlated to AD severity. We detected an overall
significant correlation between oSCORAD and CCL17 levels (Spearman *r*
= 0.446, *p*  \< 0.01) and CCL22 (Spearman *r* = 0.288, *p*  \< 0.05)
(Table [2](#) ). In addition, at baseline ( *n* = 18), a significant
correlation was detected between levels of IgE and chemokines CCL17
(Spearman *r* = 0.721, *p*  \< 0.01) and CCL22 (Spearman *r* = 0.549,
*p*  \< 0.05). Moreover, a significant correlation between galectin-9
and chemokines CCL20 (Spearman *r* = 0.585, *p*  \< 0.05) and CCL22
(Spearman *r* = 0.492, *p*  \< 0.05) was observed.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Two-tailed Spearman correlation of chemokines and T helper cell type
(Th) 2/Th1 ratio to atopic dermatitis severity (oSCORAD) ( *n* = 41).
:::

  Chemokine                       Spearman *r*   *p*Value
  ------------------------------- -------------- -----------
  CC chemokine ligand (CCL) 17    0.446          **0.002**
  CCL20                           0.163          0.273
  CCL22                           0.288          **0.049**
  CXC chemokine ligand (CXCL) 9   −0.177         0.234
  CXCL10                          0.034          0.824
  CXCL11                          0.042          0.780
  CCL17/CXCL9                     0.375          **0.009**
  CCL17/CXCL10                    0.318          **0.029**
  CCL17/CXCL11                    0.364          **0.012**
  CCL20/CXCL9                     0.239          0.105
  CCL20/CXCL10                    0.032          0.832
  CCL20/CXCL11                    0.032          0.832
  CCL22/CXCL9                     0.259          **0.079**
  CCL22/CXCL10                    0.187          0.207
  CCL22/CXCL11                    0.187          0.208
::::

Total IgE and galectin-9 were measured in serum at baseline and at the
end of intervention. Both levels, however, did not significantly change
in either group (Figures [3](#) A,B). The levels of Th2 driving
chemokines CCL17 and CCL22 significantly changed over time (Figures
[3](#) C,D). In the control group, a significant reduction of CCL22, but
not CCL17, was detected (W-test, *p*  \< 0.05), whereas in the active
group, both CCL17 and CCL22 were significantly reduced (W-test, *p*
 \< 0.05, for both). CCL20, a strong chemokine for DCs, remained
unchanged in the control group, yet was significantly reduced in the
active group after 4 months of dietary intervention (W-test, *p*
 \< 0.05) (Figure [3](#) E). While no differences were observed in the
release of Th1-driving chemokines CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 in the
control group, after 4 months of dietary intervention, CXCL9 levels were
significantly higher in the active group as compared with the control
group (MWU, *p*  \< 0.01). The dietary intervention resulted in a higher
CXCL9 level (log 10 median, 2.33; range 1.99--2.89) in the active group
as compared with the control group (1.95; 1.77--2.43) (Figures [3](#)
F--H). Moreover, additional parametric analysis using ordinary one-way
ANOVA confirm our statistical findings within the serum biomarker
analysis, although small sample size may not reveal possible skewness of
the data and therefore the parametric analysis are not shown.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Allergy markers measured in serum of the control (open dots,
<em>n</em> = 20) and active (closed triangles, <em>n</em> = 21) groups
before and after dietary intervention. Immunoglobulin E (IgE)
<strong>(A)</strong> , galectin-9 <strong>(B)</strong> , CC chemokine
ligand (CCL) 17 <strong>(C)</strong> , CCL22 <strong>(D)</strong> ,
CCL20 <strong>(E)</strong> , CXC chemokine ligand (CXCL) 9
<strong>(F)</strong> , CXCL10 <strong>(G)</strong> , and CXCL11
<strong>(H)</strong> . Line represents median ± interquartile range.
Significant differences within the groups are depicted with asterisks
(non-paired W-test, * <em>p</em>  &lt; 0.05) and between groups (using
Mann–Whitney <em>U</em> -test, ** <em>p</em>  &lt; 0.01).</figcaption>
</figure>

## Chemokine Ratios Change Over Time and due to Dietary Intervention

Knowing that the immune balance between chemokines determines the type
of cells recruited toward the lesional site, which in case of AD is the
skin, nine chemokine ratios (Th2/Th1) were analyzed. After 4 months of
dietary intervention, significantly lower CCL17/CXCL9 (MWU, *p*
 \< 0.05), CCL20/CXCL9 (MWU, *p*  \< 0.05), and CCL22/CXCL9 (MWU, *p*
 \< 0.01) ratios were observed in the active group as compared with the
control group. Moreover, a reduction in CCL17/CXCL10 (W-test, *p*
= 0.0781), CCL20/CXCL9 (W-test, *p*  \< 0.05), CCL20/CXCL10 (W-test, *p*
 \< 0.05), and CCL20/CXCL11 (W-test, *p*  \< 0.01) ratios were observed
over time within the active group. Interestingly, these ratios did not
change in the control group over time (Figure [4](#) ).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Chemokine ratios calculated in the control (open dots,
<em>n</em> = 20) and active (closed triangles, <em>n</em> = 21) groups
before and after dietary intervention. CC chemokine ligand (CCL) 17/CXC
chemokine ligand (CXCL) 9 <strong>(A)</strong> , CCL17/CXCL10
<strong>(B)</strong> , CCL22/CXCL9 <strong>(C)</strong> , CCL20/CXCL9
<strong>(D)</strong> , CCL20/CXCL10 <strong>(E)</strong> , and
CCL20/CXCL11 <strong>(F)</strong> . Line represents
median ± interquartile range. Significant differences within the groups
are depicted with asterisks (non-paired W-test, * <em>p</em>  &lt; 0.05,
** <em>p</em>  &lt; 0.01) and between groups (using Mann–Whitney
<em>U</em> -test, * <em>p</em>  &lt; 0.05, ** <em>p</em>
 &lt; 0.01).</figcaption>
</figure>
