Abstract

Cervical degenerative disease is one of the most common spinal disorders
worldwide, especially in older people. Anterior cervical corpectomy and
fusion (ACCF) is a useful method for the surgical treatment of
multi-level cervical degenerative disease. Anterior cervical disc
replacement (ACDR) is considered as an alternative surgical method.
However, both methods have drawbacks, particularly the neck motion
decrease observed after arthrodesis, and arthroplasty should only be
performed on patients presenting with cervical disc disease but without
any vertebral body disease. Therefore, we designed a non-fusion cervical
joint system, namely an artificial cervical vertebra and intervertebral
complex (ACVC), to provide a novel treatment for multi-level cervical
degenerative disease. To enhance the long-term stability of ACVC, we
applied a hydroxyapatite (HA) biocoating on the surface of the
artificial joint. Thirty-two goats were randomly divided into four
groups: a sham control group, an ACVC group, an ACVC-HA group, and an
ACCF group (titanium and plate fixation group). We performed the
prosthesis implantation in our previously established goat model. We
compared the clinical, radiological, biomechanical, and histological
outcomes among these four different groups for 24 weeks post surgery.
The goats successfully tolerated the entire experimental procedure. The
kinematics data for the ACVC and ACVC-HA groups were similar. The range
of motion (ROM) in adjacent level increased after ACCF but was not
altered after ACVC or ACVC-HA implantation. Compared with the control
group, no significant difference was found in ROM and neutral zone (NZ)
in flexion-extension or lateral bending for the ACVC and ACVC-HA groups,
whereas the ROM and NZ in rotation were significantly greater. Compared
with the ACCF group, the ROM and NZ significantly increased in all
directions. Overall, stiffness was significantly decreased in the ACVC
and ACVC-HA groups compared with the control group and the ACCF group.
Similar results were found after a fatigue test of 5,000 repetitions of
axial rotation. The histological results showed more new bone formation
and better bone implant contact in the ACVC-HA group than the ACVC
group. Goat is an excellent animal model for cervical spine
biomechanical study. Compared with the intact state and the ACCF group,
ACVC could provide immediate stability and preserve segmental movement
after discectomy and corpectomy. Besides, HA biocoating provide a better
bone ingrowth, which is essential for long-term stability. In
conclusion, ACVC-HA brings new insight to treat cervical degenerative
disease.

# Results

## Design of different artificial cervical joints

[Fig 1](#) shows photographs of the ACVC ([Fig 1B](#)), the ACVC-HA
([Fig 1C](#)), and the titanium cage and the anterior plate ([Fig
1D](#)) implants. The ball-in-trough structure ([Fig 1A-7 and 1A-8](#))
is the most important part of this unconstrained metal-on-metal ACVC
joint. In theory, the ball-in-trough articulation allows a 20° ROM in
flexion-extension, a 12° ROM in lateral bending, a 360° ROM in rotation,
and a 1.5-mm anterior-posterior slide horizontally. The ACVC-HA is an
ACVC treated with a 30-μm hydroxyapatite biocoating via microarc
oxidation technology. The titanium cage and the anterior plate were used
for goat anterior cervical discectomy and fusion. The titanium cage was
8 mm wide and could be cut to a suitable length. Because the vertebral
bodies of goats are much longer than those of humans, four to eight
screws could be used to fix the plate and the cage. The vertebral
components were hollow-structured, which allowed the surgeons to implant
the autologous bone in the hollow space. Thus, the surrounding bone
could grow into the vertebral components through the holes, this
providing long-term stability.

## Clinical and radiological assessments of the different prosthesis implantations in goats

All surgeries were successful. Surgery time, blood loss, recovery time,
and time before eating are shown in [Table 1](#). No significant
differences were found in surgery time, blood loss, recovery time, and
time before eating among ACVC, ACVC-HA, and ACCF groups. These findings
indicate that ACVC or ACVC-HA implantation did not increase surgery
time, blood loss, recovery time, and time before eating compared with
the ACCF group.

:::: table-wrap
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.t001

::: caption
###### Surgery characteristics of the four different groups.
:::

![]()

                          control group   ACVC group   ACVC-HA group   ACCF group
  ----------------------- --------------- ------------ --------------- ------------
  Surgery time (min)      12±6            68±11        67±16           65±13
  Blood loss (ml)         10±6            55±18        56±19           51±20
  Recovery time (hours)   1.1±0.6         3.6±1.7      4.1±2.0         3.5±1.4
  Eating time (hours)     1.7±0.5         4.5±1.8      4.5±2.2         3.9±2.3

No significant difference was found among ACVC, ACVC-HA, and ACCF
groups.
::::

The goats tolerated the artificial joints very well during the
experiment. All goats survived until 24 weeks after surgery. No abnormal
neurological reflexes or neurological complications were found. One goat
in the ACVC group and two goats in the ACCF group developed wound
infections 8 to 12 days after surgery. These wound infections were cured
by applying antibiotics and changing bandages daily. One goat in the
ACVC-HA group and another goat in the ACCF group suffered respiratory
infections and recovered by using antibiotics.

No bone fracture, joint dislocation, or screw loosening were found
during the experimental period. [Fig 2](#) shows the CT images of goats
in the three different groups 24 weeks after surgery. In the ACVC group,
the implant was properly located in the C3 vertebral body ([Fig 2B](#)).
The vertebral body component of the ACVC was located in the middle of
the C3 vertebral body ([Fig 2E](#)). The two lower screws were fixed to
the C4 vertebral body ([Fig 2H](#)). The titanium cage was located
between C2 and C4. The vertebral bodies from C2 to C4 were fixed by the
plate ([Fig 2C](#)). The titanium cage was located in the trough of the
C3 vertebral body ([Fig 2F](#)). The anterior plate was fixed by 3
screws to the C2 vertebral body and by 3 additional screws to the C4
vertebral body ([Fig 2I](#)).

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g002
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>CT images of goats in control group, ACVC group, ACCF group
24 weeks after the surgery (ACVC and ACVC-HA appears similar).<br />
A, B, C, Lateral views of C2 to C4 for the three groups; D, G,
transverse views of C3 and C4 vertebral bodies in control group; E, H,
transverse views of C3 and C4 vertebral bodies in ACVC group; F, I,
transverse views of C3 and C4 vertebral bodies in ACCF
group.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Biomechanical results of the different prosthesis implantations in goats

To investigate the cervical spine ROM separately, we used the
three-dimensional laser optoelectronic camera system ([Table 2](#)).
There were no significant differences among the control, ACVC, and
ACVC-HA groups inflexion-extension and lateral bending for the C2-C6,
C2-C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6 segments. The rotation ROM of the ACVC and
ACVC-HA groups were greater than the ROM of the control group for the
C2-C6 and C2-C4 segments. Accordingly, the ROM in rotation decreased in
the ACVC and ACVC-HA groups for the C4-C5 and C5-C6 segments. For the
C2-C6 and C2-C4 segments, the ROM was less for the ACCF group than for
the control group in all three directions. Accordingly, the ROM of the
C4-C5 segment in all three directions and the ROM of the C5-C6 segment
in rotation increased in the ACCF group.

:::: table-wrap
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.t002

::: caption
###### Ranges of motion profiles of the cervical segments of the four groups before the fatigue test in all directions.
:::

![]()

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Group A\          Group B\         Group C\          Group D\
                      (Control group)   (ACVC group)     (ACVC-HA group)   (ACCF group)
  ------------------- ----------------- ---------------- ----------------- ----------------------
  C2-4 (in Degrees)                                                        

  Flexion-Extension   4.0±0.6           3.9±0.6          4.0±0.3           0.4±0.1[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending     5.9±0.7           5.6±0.8          5.8±0.5           1.3±0.3[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation            7.2±0.6           11.2±0.9[a](#)   12.3±0.7[a](#)    5.6±0.5[a](#),[b](#)

  C4-5 (in Degrees)                                                        

  Flexion-Extension   1.3±0.2           1.5±0.3          1.4±0.3           2.2±0.3[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending     1.8±0.2           2.0±0.3          2.0±0.4           2.9±0.3[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation            2.2±0.3           1.2±0.3[a](#)    1.4±0.2[a](#)     3.4±0.2[a](#),[b](#)

  C5-6 (in Degrees)                                                        

  Flexion-Extension   1.4±0.2           1.3±0.2          1.4±0.1           1.6±0.2

  Lateral bending     2.0±0.3           1.9±0.3          2.2±0.4           2.2±0.4

  Rotation            2.4±0.2           1.8±0.2[a](#)    1.9±0.3[a](#)     1.6±0.1[a](#),[b](#)

  C2-6 (in Degrees)                                                        

  Flexion-Extension   6.5±0.9           6.2±0.7          6.3±1.1           4.2±0.4[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending     9.6±1.1           9.1±1.5          9.2±0.9           6.9±0.4[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation            11.2±0.8          14.5±1.3[a](#)   15.2±1.8[a](#)    9.8±0.8[a](#),[b](#)
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

no significant differences between ACVC and ACVC-HA group

^a^ P\<0.05 versus the Group A (control)

^b^ P\<0.05 versus the Group B (ACVC group) or Group C (ACVC-HA group)
::::

The biomechanical data of the C2-C4 segment recorded before the fatigue
test ([Table 3](#), Figs [3](#) and [4](#)) confirmed that the ROM of
ACVC and ACVC-HA groups in flexion-extension and lateral bending were
similar to those of the control group. It also indicated that the ROM of
ACVC and ACVC-HA groups in rotation increased compared with that of the
control group. Also, compared with the control group, ROM in all
directions was decreased in ACCF group.

:::: table-wrap
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.t003

::: caption
###### Ranges of motion, neutral zones, and stiffness profiles of the C2-4 segments of the four groups before the fatigue test in all directions.
:::

![]()

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Motion                         Group A\          Group B\          Group C\          Group D\
                                 (Control group)   (ACVC group)      (ACVC-HA group)   (ACCF group)
  ------------------------------ ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- ------------------------
  Range of Motion (in Degrees)                                                         

  Flexion-Extension              6.7±1.1           6.5±0.8           6.6±0.9           0.6±0.3[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending                10.1±1.2          9.7±1.4           9.8±1.2           2.3±0.6[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation                       10.4±0.9          18.5±1.4[a](#)    17.3±1.3[a](#)    7.4±0.6[a](#),[b](#)

  Neural Zone (in Degrees)                                                             

  Flexion-Extension              1.2±0.6           1.4±0.7           1.5±0.5           0.3±0.1[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending                1.1±0.5           1.6±0.8           1.6±0.7           0.3±0.1[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation                       1.2±0.2           3.5±0.5[a](#)     3.2±0.4[a](#)     0.5±0.2[a](#),[b](#)

  Stiffness (in Nm/Degree)                                                             

  Flexion-Extension              0.63±0.10         0.30±0.07[a](#)   0.33±0.11[a](#)   7.20±1.33[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending                0.13±0.03         0.05±0.02[a](#)   0.05±0.01[a](#)   2.53±0.67[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation                       0.21±0.02         0.02±0.00[a](#)   0.02±0.00[a](#)   1.53±0.42[a](#),[b](#)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

no significant differences between ACVC and ACVC-HA group

^a^ P\<0.05 versus the Group A (control)

^b^ P\<0.05 versus the Group B (ACVC group) or Group C (ACVC-HA group)
::::

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g003
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Typical hysteresis curves of C2-C4 level of the four groups
before fatigue test in the directions of flexion-extension (A), lateral
bending (B), and rotation (C).</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g004
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Average unidirectional ROM (A), NZ (B), and stiffness (C) of
the four different groups at 24 weeks after surgery in all directions
before the fatigue test.</figcaption>
</figure>

There was no significant NZ difference in flexion-extension and lateral
bending among control, ACVC and ACVC-HA groups. In rotation, NZ was
significantly greater for ACVC and ACVC-HA groups than for the control
group. For the ACCF group, NZ was significantly decreased in all
directions. The stiffness was significantly decreased in all directions
for the ACVC and ACVC-HA groups, while it was increased for the ACCF
group. We found similar results for the ROM, NZ, and stiffness in the
ACVC and ACVC-HA groups. Similar C2-C4 biomechanical data were found
after the 5,000repetitions of the axial rotation fatigue test ([Table
4](#), Figs [5](#) and [6](#)).

:::: table-wrap
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.t004

::: caption
###### Ranges of motion, neutral zones, and stiffness profiles of the C2 to C4 segments of the four groups after the fatigue test in all directions.
:::

![]()

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Motion                         Group A\          Group B\          Group C\          Group D\
                                 (Control group)   (ACVC group)      (ACVC-HA group)   (ACCF group)
  ------------------------------ ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- ------------------------
  Range of Motion (in Degrees)                                                         

  Flexion-Extension              6.5±0.8           6.2±0.9           6.3±1.1           0.7±0.4[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending                10.5±1.5          10.1±1.5          10.2±1.3          2.5±0.5[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation                       10.6±1.2          18.3±1.7[a](#)    18.5±1.9[a](#)    7.0±0.3[a](#),[b](#)

  Neural Zone (in Degrees)                                                             

  Flexion-Extension              1.1±0.5           1.3±0.5           1.3±0.6           0.2±0.1[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending                1.2±0.7           1.5±0.7           1.4±0.6           0.4±0.2[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation                       1.2±0.3           3.6±0.5[a](#)     3.4±0.5[a](#)     0.6±0.2[a](#),[b](#)

  Stiffness (in Nm/Degree)                                                             

  Flexion-Extension              0.69±0.20         0.35±0.10[a](#)   0.34±0.12[a](#)   7.47±1.45[a](#),[b](#)

  Lateral bending                0.15±0.04         0.04±0.01[a](#)   0.05±0.02[a](#)   2.67±0.68[a](#),[b](#)

  Rotation                       0.26±0.04         0.02±0.00[a](#)   0.02±0.00[a](#)   1.62±0.47[a](#),[b](#)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

no significant differences between ACVC and ACVC-HA group

^a^ P\<0.05 versus the Group A (control)

^b^ P\<0.05 versus the Group B (ACVC group) or Group C (ACVC-HA group)
::::

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g005
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Typical hysteresis curves of C2-C4 level of the four groups
after fatigue test in the directions of flexion-extension (A), lateral
bending (B), and rotation (C).</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g006
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Average unidirectional ROM (A), NZ (B), and stiffness (C) of
the four different groups at 24 weeks after surgery in all directions
after the fatigue test.</figcaption>
</figure>

The SI ROM and SI NZ are reported in [Table 5](#) and [Fig 7](#). The SI
ROM of the ACVC and ACVC-HA groups were positive in flexion-extension
and lateral bending but negative in rotation. The SI NZ of the ACVC and
ACVC-HA group were negative in all directions. The SI ROM and SI NZ in
the ACCF group were positive in all directions.

:::: table-wrap
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.t005

::: caption
###### Stability index of the flexibility test before the fatigue test.
:::

![]()

  Motion                                                 Group B (ACVC group)   Group C (ACVC-HA group)   Group D (ACCF group)
  ------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------
  Stability Index Range of Motion (in Degrees, SI ROM)                                                    
  Flexion-Extension                                      0.030±0.016            0.030±0.012               0.090±0.042[\*](#)
  Lateral bending                                        0.040±0.019            0.030±0.015               0.228±0.079[\*](#)
  Rotation                                               -0.779±0.156           -0.663±0.192              0.712±0.281[\*](#)
  Stability Index Neural Zone (in Degrees, SI NZ)                                                         
  Flexion-Extension                                      -0.167±0.198           -0.250±0.122              0.250±0.076[\*](#)
  Lateral bending                                        -0.4555±0.362          -0.455±0.321              0.273±0.122[\*](#)
  Rotation                                               -1.917±0.876           -1.667±0.911              0.417±0.182[\*](#)

no significant differences between ACVC and ACVC-HA group

\* P\<0.05 versus the Group B (ACVC group) or Group C (ACVC-HA group)
::::

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g007
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Average changes in the stability index ROMs and stability
index NZs from ACVC group, ACVC-HA group and ACCF group.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Histology

Histology sections of the goat cervical spines showed no inflammatory
response 24 weeks after surgery, as well as no significant metallic wear
debris at the implant-bone interface. Newly formed bone was found around
the vertebral body component of the ACVC and the self-drilling fixation
screws.

In the sections located at the ACVC vertebral body component level ([Fig
8A and 8C](#)), we found less new bone formation and more fibrous tissue
around the implant for the ACVC group ([Fig 8A](#)) than for the ACVC-HA
group ([Fig 8C](#)). In the sections located at the self-drilling
fixation screw level ([Fig 8E and 8G](#)), we found significantly more
new bone formation around the screws for the ACVC-HA group ([Fig 8G](#))
than for the ACVC group ([Fig 8E](#)). Moreover, the ACVC group had much
more fibrous tissue around the screws than the ACVC-HA group. These
findings indicate that, compared with the ACVC group, the ACVC-HA group
had a significantly higher bone-implant contact (BIC) in both sections
respectively located at the vertebral body component and screw level
([Fig 8I](#)), which is an appropriate index for measuring bone ingrowth
into the implant.

<figure>
10.1371/journal.pone.0178775.g008
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Comparison histological images of ACVC and ACVC-HA.<br />
A and B, 25X- and 100X- magnified images at the level of ACVC vertebral
body component; C and D, 25X- and 100X- magnified images at the level of
ACVC-HA vertebral body component; E and F, 25X- and 100X- magnified
images at the level of fixation screws of ACVC; G and H, 25X- and 100X-
magnified images at the level of fixation screws of ACVC-HA; I, Bone
implant contact (BIC) of ACVC and ACVC-HA at vertebral body and screw
level.</figcaption>
</figure>

The magnified images showed that bone formation around the implant
surfaces was fragmentary and that a large portion of the bone tissue was
separated from the implant surface by soft tissue in the ACVC group
([Fig 8B and 8F](#)). In contrast, in the ACVC-HA group, a large amount
of the implant surface area was surrounded by a thin layer of cartilage
on the vertebral body component of the ACVC ([Fig 8D](#)) and by
extensive and continuous newly formed bone at the level of the fixation
screws ([Fig 8H](#)).
