Abstract

## OBJECTIVE

After intensive insulin treatment, many obese African American patients
with new-onset diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and severe hyperglycemia are
able to achieve near-normoglycemia remission. The optimal treatment to
prevent hyperglycemic relapses after remission is not known.

## RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS

This prospective, 4-year, placebo-controlled study randomly assigned 48
African American subjects with DKA and severe hyperglycemia to metformin
1,000 mg daily (*n* = 17), sitagliptin 100 mg daily (*n* = 16), or
placebo (*n* = 15) after normoglycemia remission. Hyperglycemic relapse
was defined as fasting glucose \>130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L) and HbA~1c~
\>7.0% (53 mmol/mol). Oral glucose tolerance tests were conducted at
randomization and at 3 months and then every 6 months for a median of
331 days. Oral minimal model and incremental area under the curve for
insulin (AUCi) were used to calculate insulin sensitivity (Si) and
β-cell function, respectively. Disposition index (DI) was calculated as
a product of Si and incremental AUCi.

## RESULTS

Relapse-free survival was higher in sitagliptin and metformin (*P* =
0.015) compared with placebo, and mean time to relapse was significantly
prolonged in the metformin and sitagliptin groups compared with the
placebo group (480 vs. 305 days, *P* = 0.004). The probability of
relapse was significantly lower for metformin (hazard ratio 0.28 \[95%
CI 0.10--0.81\]) and sitagliptin (0.31 \[0.10--0.98\]) than for placebo.
Subjects who remained in remission had a higher DI (*P* = 0.02) and
incremental AUCi (*P* \< 0.001) than those with hyperglycemia relapse
without significant changes in Si.

## CONCLUSIONS

This study shows that near-normoglycemia remission was similarly
prolonged by treatment with sitagliptin and metformin. The prolongation
of remission was due to improvement in β-cell function.

# Results

Forty-eight African American subjects with DKA (*n* = 22) and severe
hyperglycemia (*n* = 26) were included in the study. Seventeen subjects
were randomly assigned to metformin 1,000 mg daily, 16 to sitagliptin
100 mg daily, and 15 to placebo. Four subjects in the metformin group, 6
in the sitagliptin group, and 1 in the placebo group were lost to
follow-up. One subject in the sitagliptin group and one subject in the
placebo group withdrew from the study. The overall median follow-up
after insulin discontinuation was 331 days (interquartile range 102, 612
days) with no differences between randomized groups ([Table 1](#)). The
subjects lost to follow-up or who withdrew from the study were in
near-normoglycemia remission during their last documented study visit.
There were no significant differences in baseline characteristics at
presentation between subjects who withdrew and those who stayed in the
study, except for HbA~1c~. HbA~1c~ was lower at presentation of
DKA/hyperglycemia in subjects who withdrew compared with those who
stayed (12.0 ± 2.3% \[107 ± 25 mmol/mol\] vs. 13.5 ± 2.0% \[124 ± 22
mmol/mol\], *P* = 0.03) but was similar at randomization.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Clinical characteristics of obese African American subjects with DKA and
severe hyperglycemia
:::

                                           Metformin (*n* = 17)   Sitagliptin (*n* = 16)   Placebo (*n* = 15)   *P* value
  ---------------------------------------- ---------------------- ------------------------ -------------------- -----------
  Sex (*n*)                                                                                                     0.70
   Male                                    11                     11                       8                    
   Female                                  6                      5                        7                    
  Age (years)                              48 ± 9                 50 ± 11                  46 ± 13              0.73
  At diagnosis of diabetes                                                                                      
   BMI (kg/m^2^)                           35.0 ± 4.3             37.3 ± 10.0              34.9 ± 5.2           0.96
   DKA/severe hyperglycemia (*n*)          7/10                   10/6                     5/10                 0.26
   Family history of type 2 diabetes (%)   71                     88                       80                   0.56
   FBG                                                                                                          0.49
    mmol/L                                 40.8 ± 13.5            41.7 ± 18.7              43.7 ± 12.2          
    mg/dL                                  735 ± 243              750 ± 336                787 ± 219            
   GAD antibody positivity \[*n* (%)\]     2 (12)                 0 (0)[\*](#)             3 (23)[\*](#)        0.20
   HbA~1c~                                                                                                      0.85
    %                                      13.1 ± 2.0             13.1 ± 2.5               13.1 ± 2.3           
    mmol/mol                               120 ± 21               120 ± 27                 120 ± 25             
   Fasting C-peptide (pg/L)                2.8 ± 1.1              3.4 ± 1.2                3.1 ± 1.2            0.43
  At randomization                                                                                              
   FBG                                                                                                          0.21
    mmol/L                                 6.3 ± 1.0              6.2 ± 0.9                7.0 ± 1.3            
    mg/dL                                  114 ± 18               111 ± 16                 125 ± 24             
   HbA~1c~                                                                                                      0.28
    %                                      6.2 ± 0.9              6.5 ± 0.7                6.6 ± 0.5            
    mmol/mol                               44 ± 10                48 ± 8                   49 ± 6               
   Insulin dose (units/kg/day)             0.5 ± 0.2              0.6 ± 0.3                0.8 ± 0.4            0.08
   Length of insulin use (weeks)           9.5 ± 3.0              7.6 ± 3.2                9.2 ± 2.7            0.14
   ΔWeight from enrollment (kg)            1.8 (−1.0, 5.9)        −0.1 (−3.5, 5.1)         −4.6 (−6.3, 0.5)     0.08
  At end of study---all subjects                                                                                
   Duration of treatment[†](#) (days)      472 (242, 716)         194 (92, 613)            194 (91, 579)        0.19
   ΔWeight from randomization (kg)         0 (−3.6, 3.5)          3.3 (−0.7, 6.0)          1.4 (−2.2, 2.9)      0.10
   FBG                                                                                                          0.10
    mmol/L                                 6.7 ± 1.2              6.9 ± 1.5                8.5 ± 3.2            
    mg/dL                                  121 ± 22               124 ± 27                 153 ± 58             
   HbA~1c~                                                                                                      0.04
    %                                      6.4 ± 1.2              6.6 ± 1.1                7.6 ± 1.6            
    mmol/mol                               46 ± 13                48 ± 12                  55 ± 22              
  Near-normoglycemia remission (*n*)       12                     12                       4                    
   End-of-study FBG                                                                                             0.04
    mmol/L                                 6.2 ± 1.1              6.1 ± 0.4                7.4 ± 0.8            
    mg/dL                                  112 ± 19               110 ± 7                  134 ± 15             
   End-of-study HbA~1c~                                                                                         0.80
    %                                      5.8 ± 0.7              6.1 ± 0.7                6.1 ± 0.5            
    mmol/mol                               40 ± 8                 43 ± 8                   43 ± 6               
  Hyperglycemia relapse (*n*)              5                      4                        11                   
   End-of-study FBG                                                                                             0.51
    mmol/L                                 7.9 ± 0.4              9.1 ± 1.3                8.9 ± 3.8            
    mg/dL                                  142 ± 7                163 ± 23                 160 ± 68             
   End-of-study HbA~1c~                                                                                         0.94
    %                                      8.0 ± 0.9              8.0 ± 0.9                8.2 ± 1.5            
    mmol/mol                               64 ± 10                64 ± 10                  66 ± 16              

Data are mean ± SD or median (interquartile range) unless otherwise
indicated. FBG, fasting blood glucose.

\*Missing GAD antibody levels for one subject in the sitagliptin group
and two subjects in the placebo group.

†Median time of follow-up after randomization and insulin
discontinuation.
::::

At presentation of DKA and severe hyperglycemia, there were no
differences in age and BMI among the metformin, sitagliptin, or placebo
groups ([Table 1](#)). Although not statistically significant, both the
sitagliptin and metformin groups had more men than women, whereas the
placebo group had similar proportions of men and women. In the
proportion of subjects with DKA or severe hyperglycemia, length and dose
of insulin use before randomization (time to near-normoglycemia
remission) did not differ between groups. At randomization, there were
no significant changes in weight or differences in fasting glucose or
HbA~1c~ levels. At the end of the study, there was a significant
difference in HbA~1c~ (*P* = 0.04) between the groups ([Table 1](#)). In
the patients who remained in near-normoglycemia remission, there was a
significant difference in fasting glucose at the end of the study
([Table 1](#)). There were no differences at diagnosis of diabetes in
the subjects who remained in near-normoglycemia remission compared with
those with hyperglycemia relapse at presentation ([Table 2](#)). At
randomization, fasting glucose levels were higher in subjects who
experienced hyperglycemia relapse than in those who remained in
remission ([Table 2](#)). At the end of the study, fasting glucose and
HbA~1c~ levels were higher in the subjects who experienced hyperglycemia
relapse ([Table 2](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Clinical characteristics of obese African American patients with DKA and
severe hyperglycemia with near-normoglycemia remission compared with
those with hyperglycemia relapse
:::

                                               Near-normoglycemia remission (*n* = 28)   Hyperglycemia relapse (*n* = 20)   *P* value
  -------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- ---------------------------------- -----------
  Sex (*n*)                                                                                                                 0.38
   Male                                        19                                        11                                 
   Female                                      9                                         9                                  
  Age (years)                                  48 ± 10                                   49 ± 12                            0.73
  At diagnosis of diabetes                                                                                                  
   BMI (kg/m^2^)                               35.2 ± 5.0                                36.6 ± 9.0                         0.96
   DKA/severe hyperglycemia (*n*)              15/13                                     7/13                               0.24
   Family history of type 2 diabetes (%)       82                                        90                                 0.68
   FBG                                                                                                                      0.95
    mmol/L                                     42.5 ± 16                                 41.4 ± 13.2                        
    mg/dL                                      765 ± 288                                 745 ± 239                          
   GAD antibody positivity[†](#) \[*n* (%)\]   2 (7)                                     3 (17)                             0.64
   HbA~1c~                                                                                                                  0.75
    %                                          13.2 ± 2.2                                13.0 ± 2.2                         
    mmol/mol                                   121 ± 24                                  119 ± 24                           
   Fasting C-peptide (pg/L)                    3.3 ± 1.1                                 2.8 ± 1.3                          0.25
  At randomization                                                                                                          
   FBG                                                                                                                      0.007
    mmol/L                                     6.1 ± 0.9                                 7.0 ± 1.1                          
    mg/dL                                      110 ± 17                                  126 ± 20                           
   HbA~1c~                                                                                                                  0.14
    %                                          6.3 ± 0.8                                 6.7 ± 0.5                          
    mmol/mol                                   49 ± 12                                   60 ± 16                            
   Insulin dose (units/kg/day)                 0.6 ± 0.2                                 0.7 ± 0.4                          0.67
   Length of insulin use (weeks)               8.6 ± 3.1                                 9.1 ± 2.9                          0.57
   ΔWeight from enrollment (kg)                −0.4 (−6.9, 1.8)                          0.8 (−5.4, 4.5)                    0.24
  At end of study                                                                                                           
   ΔWeight from randomization (kg)             −0.4 (−2.5, 3.1)                          2.1 (−0.4, 5.6)                    0.11
   FBG                                                                                                                      \<0.0001
    mmol/L                                     6.3 ± 0.9                                 8.7 ± 2.8                          
    mg/dL                                      114 ± 17                                  156 ± 50                           
   HbA~1c~                                                                                                                  \<0.0001
    %                                          6.0 ± 0.7                                 8.1 ± 1.2                          
    mmol/mol                                   42 ± 8                                    65 ± 13                            

Data are mean ± SD or median (interquartile range) unless otherwise
indicated. FBG, fasting blood glucose.

†Missing GAD antibody levels for one subject in the near-normoglycemia
remission group and two subjects in the hyperglycemia relapse group.
::::

Hyperglycemia relapse-free survival was significantly higher in the
metformin and sitagliptin groups than in the placebo group (*P* = 0.015)
([Fig. 1](#)). The 2-year failure rate was higher in the placebo than in
the sitagliptin (77% vs. 44%, *P* = 0.113) or metformin (77% vs. 34%,
*P* = 0.013) groups. Compared with placebo, patients randomized to
metformin (hazard ratio 0.28 \[95% CI 0.10--0.814\]) and sitagliptin
(0.31 \[0.10--0.98\]) were ∼70% less likely to have a hyperglycemia
relapse. However, there was no difference in hyperglycemia relapse-free
survival between metformin and sitagliptin (*P* = 0.75) ([Fig. 1](#)).
The restricted mean time to hyperglycemia relapse in the combined
metformin and sitagliptin groups was significantly higher than placebo
(480 vs. 305 days, *P* = 0.004).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Cox proportional hazards of failure-free survival among
metformin, sitagliptin, and placebo in obese African American patients
presenting with DKA and severe hyperglycemia. A significant difference
was found among the placebo, metformin, and sitagliptin groups
(<em>P</em> = 0.015), but no significant difference was found between
the sitagliptin and metformin groups (<em>P</em> = 0.75).</figcaption>
</figure>

We also assessed whether being on medication decreased the severity of
hyperglycemia relapse. Because only a small number of subjects
experienced relapse in the medication groups (metformin \[*n* = 5\],
sitagliptin \[*n* = 4\]) compared with placebo (*n* = 11), we combined
the metformin and sitagliptin groups. There were no significant
differences in HbA~1c~ (8.0 ± 0.8% \[64 ± 9 mmol/mol\] vs. 8.2 ± 1.5%
\[66 ± 16 mmol/mol\], *P* = 0.79) or blood glucose (152 ± 18 mg/dL \[8.4
± 1 mmol/L\] vs. 160 ± 68 mg/dL \[8.9 ± 3.8 mmol/L\], *P* = 0.65) levels
at the time of hyperglycemia relapse between the placebo group and the
combined metformin and sitagliptin group. In the placebo group, 3 of the
11 subjects who experienced hyperglycemia relapse presented to the
emergency department with a glucose level \>400 mg/dL (22.2 mmol/mol) or
DKA. None of the patients in the metformin and sitagliptin group had a
hyperglycemia relapse necessitating a visit to the emergency department
or admission to the hospital.

The difference in hyperglycemia relapse was explained by improvements in
β-cell function. Over the course of the study, DI (*P* = 0.02) and
incremental AUCi (*P* \< 0.001) were significantly higher in subjects
who remained in near-normoglycemia remission compared with those who had
a hyperglycemia relapse without any differences in Si (*P* = 0.75).
There was a significant interaction between remission status and study
visit for both Si (*P* = 0.01) and DI (*P* = 0.02), suggesting a
different pattern of change in Si and DI over time between subjects with
near-normoglycemia remission and hyperglycemia relapse. The difference
in DI and incremental AUCi was not present at randomization in the
subjects who stayed in near-normoglycemia remission compared with those
who experienced a hyperglycemia relapse ([Fig. 2*A* and *B*](#)). At the
last documented follow-up, there were no differences in Si ([Fig.
2*C*](#)); however, DI (*P* = 0.02) and incremental AUCi (*P* \< 0.001)
were significantly higher in subjects who stayed in near-normoglycemia
remission than in those who had a hyperglycemia relapse at the end of
the study ([Fig. 2*A* and *B*](#)). Comparison across treatment groups
showed no differences at randomization, over the course of the study, or
at the last follow-up for DI, incremental AUCi, or Si (data not shown).
Similarly, a comparison of subjects with an initial presentation of DKA
and severe hyperglycemia showed no differences in Si, incremental AUCi,
or DI at randomization, over the course of the study, or at the last
follow-up (data not shown). Although there were no significant changes
in weight, we performed analyses adjusting for changes in weight
throughout the course of the study. No differences were found in Si,
incremental AUCi, or DI compared with unadjusted analyses.

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>DI, incremental AUCi, and Si at randomization and last
follow-up. At randomization OGTT, no significant differences were found
in DI, incremental AUCi, or Si in subjects who remained in
near-normoglycemia remission at the end of the study compared with those
with hyperglycemia relapse. During the last follow-up OGTT, subjects who
remained in remission had higher DI and incremental AUCi than those who
had a relapse (<em>A</em> and <em>B</em>) without a difference in Si
(<em>C</em>).</figcaption>
</figure>
