Abstract

## Introduction:

Evaluation of students' learning in clinical education system is one of
the most important and challenging issues that facilities in this field
have been facing. The present study aimed to evaluate the role of
feedback during evaluation in increasing emergency medicine residents'
clinical skills.

## Method:

The present experimental study was performed on all second year
emergency medicine residents of two educational hospitals, Tehran, Iran,
with switching replications design and before-after method. They were
randomly allocated to two groups (with or without feedback) and
evaluated three times regarding chest ultrasonography for trauma
patients, using direct observation of procedural skills (DOPS) and valid
and reliable checklist. Data were analyzed using SPSS 20.

## Results:

30 emergency medicine residents with the mean age of 36.63 ± 30.30 years
were allocated to two equal groups (56.7% male). Studied groups were
similar regarding the baseline characteristics. In both groups, obtained
scores showed a significant increase from the first to the third
evaluation (p \< 0.001). Mean scores of first and second evaluations
were 10.24 ± 0.77, 17.73 ± 0.46 in feedback receivers and 9.73 ± 0.77
and 12.13 ± 0.47 in others (p \< 0.001). Mean third score after
switching groups were 18.53 ± 0.22 in feedback receivers and 18.99 ±
0.22 in others (p = 0.213).

## Conclusion:

Based on the findings of the present study, giving feedback after
evaluating the second year emergency medicine residents regarding chest
ultrasonography for trauma patients, led to a significant improvement in
their scores in future evaluations and consequently their skill.

# Results

***Baseline characteristics***

30 emergency medicine residents with the mean age of 36.63 ± 30.30 (29 -
47) years participated (56.7% male). They were randomly allocated to
either Loghman Hakim (group 1) or Imam Hossein hospitals (group 2).
[Table 1](#) shows the baseline characteristics of the participants. The
two studied groups were similar regarding the baseline characteristics.
25 (83.4%) residents performed chest ultrasonography more than five
times (56.7% more than 10 times) and 25 (83.3%) residents believed that
chest ultrasonography for trauma patients had medium to high difficulty
level.

***Outcomes***

Mean scores of the residents in the first, second, and third evaluations
were 10.00 ± 0.54, 14.93 ± 0.32, and 18.72 ± 0.15, respectively. [Figure
1](#) shows the scores obtained by the residents for the 3 evaluations
done based on the hospital. In both groups, obtained scores showed a
significant increase from the first to the third evaluation (p \< 0.001)
according to Greenhouse-Geisser Correction test.

Mean score obtained for preparation, scan and post-scan items among all
residents were 3.34 ± 0.91, 9.48 ± 3.16, and 1.72 ± 0.97, respectively.
[Tables 2](#) and [3](#) compare the scores obtained by each group in
the 3 tests qualitatively and quantitatively. Mean scores of first and
second evaluations were 10.24 ± 0.77, 17.73 ± 0.46 in feedback receivers
and 9.73 ± 0.77 and 12.13 ± 0.47 in others (p \< 0.001). Mean third
score after switching groups were 18.53 ± 0.22 in feedback receivers and
18.99 ± 0.22 in others (p = 0.213). As can be seen, residents in Loghman
Hakim Hospital were significantly better in the second exam both
quantitatively and qualitatively.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline characteristics of participants
:::

  **Variable**                                   **Loghman Hakim**   **Imam Hossein**   **P**
  ---------------------------------------------- ------------------- ------------------ -------
  **Mean age (year)**                            34.93 ± 5.40        38.33 ± 5.23       0.091
  **Sex**                                                                               
  Male                                           9 (60)              8 (53.3)           0.71
  Female                                         6 (40)              7 (46.7)           
  **Background experience1(time)**                                                      
  1 -4                                           3 (20)              2 (13.3)           0.879
  5- 9                                           4 (26.7)            4 (26.7)           
  ≥ 10                                           8 (53.3)            9 (60)             
  **Background attitude** ^2^ **(difficulty)**                                          
  Low                                            4 (26.7)            1 (6.7)            0.241
  Medium                                         10 (66.7)           11 (73.3)          
  High                                           1 (6.7)             3 (20)             
  **Mean promotion exam score**^3^               81.06 ± 6.29        82.42 ± 6.27       0.565

Data were presented as mean ± standard deviation or frequency
(percentage);

1: Previous experience of chest ultrasonography;

2: Attitude of the resident regarding the difficulty of the procedure;

3: Score in exam taken for promotion from year 1 to year 2 of the
residency program (out of 100).
::::

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Trend of scores (minimum 0 and maximum 20) in three
evaluations of studied groups (p &lt; 0.001, based on Greenhouse-Geisser
Correction</figcaption>
</figure>

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Comparison of mean evaluation scores between groups
:::

  **Evaluation**             **Loghman Hakim**   **Imam Hossein**   **P-value**
  -------------------------- ------------------- ------------------ -------------
  **Preparation (0 -- 4)**                                          
  First                      3.00 ± 0.75         2.1 ± 0.92         0.009
  Second                     4.00 ± 0.00         3.00 ± 0.85        \< 0.0001
  Third                      3.93 ± 0.26         4.00 ± 0.00        0.326
  **Scan (0 -- 13)**                                                
  First                      6.87 ± 2.39         6.27 ± 2.43        0.501
  Second                     11.60 ± 0.99        7.33 ± 1.95        \< 0.001
  Third                      12.53 ± 0.74        12.26 ± 0.59       0.287
  **Post scan (0 -- 3)**                                            
  First                      0.40 ± 0.63         1.20 ± 0.67        0.002
  Second                     2.13 ± 0.35         1.80 ± 0.86        0.176
  Third                      2.53 ± 0.64         2.27 ± 0.71        0.287
  **Total (0 - 20)**                                                
  First                      10.26 ± 2.99        9.73 ± 2.94        0.626
  Second                     17.73 ± 1.09        12.13 ± 2.29       \<0.001
  Third                      18.93 ± 0.96        18.53 ± 0.74       0.213

Data were presented as mean ± standard deviation.
::::
