Abstract

## Background

Few clinical trials have investigated the safety and efficacy of
mesenchymal stem cells for the management of post-traumatic
osteoarthritis. The objectives of this pilot study were to determine the
safety and tolerability and to explore the efficacy of a single
intra-articular injection of allogeneic human mesenchymal precursor
cells (MPCs) to improve clinical symptoms and retard joint structural
deterioration over 24 months in patients following anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) reconstruction.

## Methods

In this phase Ib/IIa, double-blind, active comparator clinical study, 17
patients aged 18--40 years with unilateral ACL reconstruction were
randomized (2:1) to receive either a single intra-articular injection of
75 million allogeneic MPCs suspended in hyaluronan (HA) (MPC + HA group)
(*n* = 11) or HA alone (*n* = 6). Patients were monitored for adverse
events. Immunogenicity was evaluated by anti-HLA panel reactive
antibodies (PRA) against class I and II HLAs determined by flow
cytometry. Pain, function, and quality of life were assessed using the
Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) and SF-36v2 scores.
Joint space width was measured from radiographs, and tibial cartilage
volume and bone area assessed from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

## Results

Moderate arthralgia and swelling within 24 h following injection that
subsided were observed in 4 out of 11 in the MPC + HA group and 0 out of
6 HA controls. No cell-related serious adverse effects were observed.
Increases in class I PRA \>10% were observed at week 4 in the MPC + HA
group that decreased to baseline levels by week 104. Compared with the
HA group, MPC + HA-treated patients showed greater improvements in KOOS
pain, symptom, activities of daily living, and SF-36 bodily pain scores
(*p* \< 0.05). The MPC + HA group had reduced medial and lateral
tibiofemoral joint space narrowing (*p* \< 0.05), less tibial bone
expansion (0.5% vs 4.0% over 26 weeks, *p* = 0.02), and a trend towards
reduced tibial cartilage volume loss (0.7% vs --4.0% over 26 weeks, *p*
= 0.10) than the HA controls.

## Conclusions

Intra-articular administration of a single allogeneic MPC injection
following ACL reconstruction was safe, well tolerated, and may improve
symptoms and structural outcomes. These findings suggest that MPCs
warrant further investigations as they may modulate some of the
pathological processes responsible for the development of post-traumatic
osteoarthritis following ACL reconstruction.

## Trial registration

ClinicalTrials.gov ([NCT01088191](#)) registration date: March 11, 2010﻿

## Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13075-017-1391-0)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

# Results

## Baseline characteristics of study participants

The baseline characteristics of the study participants are shown in
Table [2](#). There were no significant differences between the two
groups in terms of age, gender, body mass index, tibial cartilage
volume, tibial bone area, joint space width, tibial cartilage volume, or
bone area. Apart from the KOOS activities of daily living (ADL) scores
for the HA injected individuals, both groups exhibited KOOS baseline
scores that were below the cut-off scores for individuals with physical
problems associated with injured knees \[[7](#)\]. However, participants
in the MPC + HA group reported worse KOOS pain (*p* = 0.02), symptoms
(*p* \< 0.001), ADL score (*p* = 0.047), and SF-36v2 bodily pain (*p* =
0.01) score than the HA-alone group at baseline. No significant
differences in baseline characteristics were observed between completers
and non-completers at 6, 12, and 24 months of follow-up as shown in
Fig. [1](#) (Additional files [1](#), [2](#) and [3](#): Tables S1--S3).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline characteristics of study participants
:::

                                                                            MPC + HA (*n* = 11)   HA alone (*n* = 6)   *p*\*
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------- -------------------- ---------
  Age, years                                                                26.0 (3.6)            26.9 (10.3)          0.85
  Females, number (%)                                                       3 (27)                2 (33)               0.79
  Body mass index, kg/m^2^                                                  25.1 (3.1)            25.1 (4.6)           1.00
  Interval between ACL injury and reconstruction, days                      76.5 (54.3)           61.7 (34.8)          0.56
  Interval between ACL reconstruction and intra-articular injection, days   48.5 (14.0)           47.8 (8.3)           0.92
  KOOS                                                                                                                 
   Pain                                                                     69.1 (11.7)           84.2 (11.9)          0.02
   Symptoms                                                                 59.7 (10.8)           83.9 (11.7)          \<0.001
   Activities of daily living                                               82.1 (11.0)           92.8 (6.4)           0.047
   Sport and recreation function                                            29.7 (17.6)           40.0 (14.1)          0.47
   Knee-related quality of life                                             40.9 (19.8)           50.0 (16.8)          0.36
  SF-36 physical component score                                            41.3 (4.7)            45.9 (5.8)           0.11
   Physical functioning                                                     41.0 (6.2)            43.7 (1.7)           0.31
   Role limitation: physical                                                40.0 (7.0)            42.6 (8.1)           0.51
   Bodily pain                                                              42.3 (8.6)            53.5 (5.4)           0.01
   General health perception                                                55.2 (6.6)            55.4 (7.9)           0.95
  Joint space width, mm                                                                                                
   Medial tibiofemoral compartment                                          4.36 (0.55)           4.97 (0.63)          0.06
   Lateral tibiofemoral compartment                                         5.38 (0.62)           5.67 (0.52)          0.36
  Knee structure measured from MRI                                                                                     
   Medial tibial cartilage volume, mm^3^                                    2456 (397)            2627 (476)           0.44
   Lateral tibial cartilage volume, mm^3^                                   3291 (401)            3548 (847)           0.51
   Medial tibial plateau bone area, mm^2^                                   2299 (337)            2187 (182)           0.46
   Lateral tibial plateau bone area, mm^2^                                  1472 (202)            1415 (193)           0.58

Data are reported as mean (SD) or number (%)

\*For difference between two groups using independent samples *t* test
or chi-squared test where appropriate

*ACL* anterior cruciate ligament, *KOOS* Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis
Outcome Score, *MRI* magnetic resonance imaging
::::

## Adverse events

The incidence of adverse events was graded according to the National
Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
(NCICTCAE) and is summarised in Table [3](#). No participants
experienced treatment-related or treatment-emergent serious adverse
events that resulted in death, treatment discontinuation, or study
termination over the course of the study.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Incidence of adverse events
:::

                                                          MPC + HA (*n* = 11)   HA alone (*n* = 6)
  ------------------------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------
  Total number of adverse events                          94                    39
   Non-serious, *n* (%)                                   92 (97.9)             39 (100.0)
   Serious, *n* (%)                                       2 (2.1)^\#^           0 (0.0)
  Adverse events by system organ class\*, *n* (grade)                           
   Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders        11 (2)                6 (1)
   General disorders and administration site conditions   3 (2)                 1 (1)
   Injury, poisoning, and procedural complications        2 (1)                 2 (1)
   Infections and infestations                            1 (1)                 1 (1)
   Respiratory, thoracic, and mediastinal disorders       1 (1)                 0
   Immune system disorders                                2 (2)                 1 (2)

\* Graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events (NCICTCAE)

^\#^ Non-treatment related
::::

In the MPC + HA group, increases in class I PRA \>10% were observed in 5
out of 6 patients at week 4, in 5 out of 7 patients at week 36, in 2 out
of 7 patients at week 78, and in 1 out of 6 patients at week 104. In the
HA-alone group, only 1 out of 4 patients had increases in class I PRA
\>10% at week 4, and this level was maintained through to week 104. None
of the study participants exhibited clinically significant abnormalities
in haematology or blood chemistry laboratory results over the course of
the study. No major changes in vital signs were reported following
injection of the test substances, nor were there notable changes from
baseline in the physical examination data. No ectopic tissue formation
was noted from the blinded MRI evaluations.

## Serious adverse events

Two serious adverse events, fracture of the humerus and infective
bursitis, were reported for patients in the MPC + HA group after week
52. These were not considered to be treatment related.

## Effect of MPCs on knee pain, function, and quality of life over 24 months

There was an improvement from baseline in both groups for all the KOOS
dimensions over 24 months (Fig. [2](#), Additional file [4](#): Table
S4). However, significant differences between treatment groups were
observed for KOOS symptoms and pain at 18 months (both *p* = 0.03) and
24 months (*p* = 0.04 and 0.02, respectively), and for ADL at 18 months
(*p* = 0.04), all in favour of patients who were injected with the MPC +
HA preparation (Fig. [2](#), Additional file [4](#): Table S4). There
was also an improvement over 24 months in both groups for all SF-36
physical components except for general health perception (Fig. [2](#),
Additional file [5](#): Table S5). However, statistically significant
differences between treatments were only observed for bodily pain at 6,
12, and 24 months (*p* = 0.02, 0.05, and 0.03, respectively), where
injection with the MPH + HA preparation was found to be more beneficial
than HA alone (Fig. [2](#), Additional file [5](#): Table S5).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Change from baseline in <strong>a–c</strong> Knee Injury and
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (<em>KOOS</em>) (pain scores
(<strong>a</strong>), symptom scores (<strong>b</strong>), and
activities of daily living (<em>ADL</em>) scores (<strong>c</strong>)),
and <strong>d</strong> SF-36 physical component scores over 24 months
(mean and 95% confidence interval shown). *<em>p</em> &lt;﻿ 0.05﻿
<em>HA</em> hyaluronan, <em>MPC</em> mesenchymal precursor
cell</figcaption>
</figure>

## Effect of MPCs on tibial cartilage volume change over 24 months

There was no significant difference in annual change in medial or
lateral tibial cartilage volume between the MPC + HA and HA-alone groups
over 6, 12, and 24 months (Table [4](#)). However, the MPC + HA group
tended to have a reduced rate of medial tibial cartilage volume loss
compared with the HA-alone group over the first 6 months of the study
(0.7% vs --4.0%, *p* = 0.10) (Table [4](#)).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Annual percentage change from baseline in tibial cartilage volume over
24 months
:::

                  MPC + HA      HA alone      *p*\*
  --------------- ------------- ------------- -------
  Medial tibia                                
   6 months       0.7 (5.9)     --4.0 (3.9)   0.10
   12 months      0.3 (6.3)     --2.4 (3.1)   0.36
   24 months      --1.4 (4.2)   --3.3 (5.3)   0.54
  Lateral tibia                               
   6 months       --1.4 (5.3)   --2.7 (4.4)   0.65
   12 months      --4.7 (3.4)   --2.6 (2.5)   0.25
   24 months      --3.7 (3.4)   --0.8 (3.5)   0.22

Data are reported as mean (SD)

\* For difference between two groups using independent samples *t* test

*HA* hyaluronan, *MPC* mesenchymal precursor cell
::::

## Effect of MPCs on tibial bone expansion over 24 months

The rate of total tibial bone expansion in the MPC + HA group showed a
significantly decrease compared with the HA-alone group over the first 6
months post-treatment (0.5% vs 4.0%, *p* = 0.02) (Table [5](#)). The
trend was maintained over the subsequent 12 and 24 months (both *p* =
0.09).

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Annual percentage tibial bone expansion from baseline over 24 months
:::

                           MPC + HA      HA alone    *p*\*
  ------------------------ ------------- ----------- -------
  Medial tibial plateau                              
   6 months                0.8 (3.9)     4.2 (3.4)   0.13
   12 months               --1.9 (4.0)   1.5 (3.6)   0.17
   24 months               0.1 (1.7)     0.8 (0.9)   0.43
  Lateral tibial plateau                             
   6 months                0.4 (4.2)     3.6 (3.6)   0.17
   12 months               --0.2 (4.0)   1.9 (2.8)   0.35
   24 months               --1.8 (2.6)   1.2 (3.5)   0.16
  Total tibial plateau                               
   6 months                0.5 (2.4)     4.0 (2.3)   0.02
   12 months               --1.2 (2.8)   1.7 (2.0)   0.09
   24 months               --0.7 (1.5)   1.0 (1.1)   0.09

Data are reported as mean (SD)

\* For difference between two groups using independent samples *t* test

*HA* hyaluronan, *MPC* mesenchymal precursor cell
::::

## Effect of MPCs on tibiofemoral joint space width over 24 months

Radiological assessments of the mean joint space width of patients when
expressed as individual changes from baseline revealed a greater
increase in the MPC + HA group than the HA-alone group at 12, 18, and 24
months post-administration (Fig. [3](#), Additional file [6](#): Table
S6). In the medial compartment, injection with MPC + HA resulted in a
greater joint space width increase compared with the HA-alone group at
18 months (*p* = 0.03) and 24 months (*p* = 0.07) (Fig. [3](#),
Additional file [6](#): Table S6). In the lateral compartment, joint
space width increased relative to baseline in the MPC + HA group but
declined in the HA-alone group. This resulted in significant differences
between treatment at 12 months (*p* = 0.01), 18 months (*p* = 0.03), and
24 months (*p* = 0.04) (Fig. [3](#), Additional file [6](#): Table S6).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Change from baseline in tibiofemoral joint space width over
24 months (﻿medial joint space width (<strong>a</strong>) and lateral
joint space width (<strong>b</strong>)) (mean and 95% confidence
interval shown). <em>HA</em> hyaluronan, <em>MPC</em> mesenchymal
precursor cell</figcaption>
</figure>
