Abstract

# Abstract

## Background:

In some studies, gum-chewing was demonstrated to have a beneficial
effect on resumption of bowel function; however, other contradictory
findings in other studies refute the effects of gum-chewing on
peristaltic movements and digestive system stimulation. In addition,
most previous studies were after colorectal or gynecology surgery,
whereas few reports focused on the effect of gum-chewing after
gastrectomy. The aim of this randomized controlled trial was to assess
the effectiveness of gum-chewing on postoperative bowel function in
patients who had undergone laparoscopic gastrectomy.

## Methods:

From March 2014 to March 2016, 75 patients with gastric cancer received
elective laparoscopic surgery in Shanghai Tongji hospital and were
postoperatively randomly divided into 2 groups: 38 in a gum-chewing
(Gum) group and 37 in a control (No gum) group. The patients in the Gum
group chewed sugarless gum 3 times daily, each time for at least 15
minutes, until the day of postoperative exhaust defecation.

## Results:

The mean time to first flatus (83.4 ± 35.6 vs. 79.2 ± 24.2 hours;
*P* = 0.554) and the mean time to first defecation (125.7 ± 41.2 vs.
115.4 ± 34.2 hours; *P* = 0.192) were no different between the no gum
and Gum groups. There was also no significant difference in the
incidence of postoperative ileus (*P* = 0.896) and postoperative
hospital stay (*P* = 0.109) between the 2 groups. The postoperative pain
score at 48 hours (*P* = 0.032) in the Gum group was significantly
higher than in the no gum group. There was no significant difference
between the 2 groups in regards to patient demographics, comorbidities,
duration of surgery, complications, and nausea/vomiting score.

## Conclusion:

Gum-chewing after laparoscopic gastrectomy did not hasten the return of
gastrointestinal function. In addition, gum-chewing may increase patient
pain on the second postoperative day.

# Results

Between March 2014 and March 2016, 85 patients participated in this
trial. After 10 patients were excluded before randomization (see
flowchart), a total of 75 patients were randomly assigned to either the
Gum (n = 38) or No gum (n = 37) group.

Baseline characteristics were similar between the 2 groups (Table
[2](#)). There were no differences in sex, age, comorbidities, and ASA
grade. Twenty-one patients in the No gum group had comorbidities before
their operations, as did 21 patients in the Gum group. The most common
comorbidities included primary hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus,
post-stroke syndrome, and coronary artery disease.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Baseline characteristics.
:::

![]()
::::

The operation outcomes for both groups are shown in Table [2](#). Two
cases in the No gum group and 4 cases in the Gum group were converted to
open surgery. There was no significant difference in the duration of
operation between the 2 groups. The rates of POI of the 2 groups did not
significantly differ. In the No gum group, 1 patient developed CD grade
I complications: wound infection requiring dressing change. Grade II
complications occurred in 2 patients: pneumonia requiring antibiotics.
One patient developed a grade III complication: pleural effusion and
atelectasis requiring thoracocentesis under local anesthesia. In the Gum
group, 1 patient developed CD grade I complications: wound infection
requiring dressing change. Grade II complications occurred in 4
patients: 2 developed pneumonia requiring antibiotics, 1 developed liver
abscess requiring antibiotics, and 1 developed congestive heart failure
requiring cardiac glycosides and diuretics. Two patients developed a
grade III complication: pleural effusion and atelectasis requiring
thoracocentesis under local anesthesia. There was no perioperative
mortality in this series.

Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) with fentanyl was administered to all
the patients. There was no significant difference in fentanyl
consumption between the 2 groups (*P* = 0.969).

As shown in Table [3](#), there was no significant difference in the
mean time to the onset of gas passage (*P* = 0.554) or defecation
(*P* = 0.192) between the 2 groups. There was also no significant
difference in the incidence of POI (*P* = 0.896) and postoperative
hospital stay (*P* = 0.109) between the 2 groups.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Operative outcomes.
:::

![]()
::::

Pain scores after operation are listed in Table [4](#). We found that
the 48-hour postoperative pain scores in the Gum group were
significantly higher (*P* = 0.032). However, the 24-, 72-, and
72-hour-after pain scores were not significantly different between the 2
groups. We evaluated nausea and vomiting scores 24, 48, 72, and after
72 hours in the patients (Table [5](#)). Between the 2 groups, 24 hours,
48 hours, 72 hours, and 72 hours-after nausea and vomiting scores were
not significantly different.

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Pain score after operation.
:::

![]()
::::

:::: table-wrap
::: caption
Nausea and vomiting score after operation.
:::

![]()
::::
