Abstract

Stress-related illnesses are a growing health problem in the Western
world; which also has economic significance for society. As a
consequence; there is a growing demand for effective treatments. The
study investigates the long-term efficacy of the Nacadia^®^ nature-based
therapy (NNBT) by comparing it to the efficacy of a validated cognitive
behavioral therapy, called STreSS. The study is designed as a randomized
controlled trial in which 84 participants are randomly allocated between
the treatments. Long-term efficacy is investigated through data extracts
from the national database of Statistics Denmark on the sick leave and
the health-care consumption. The results show that both the NNBT and the
STreSS lead to a significant decrease in number of contacts with a
general practitioner in the period from twelve months prior to treatment
to twelve months after treatment; and, a significant decrease in
long-term sick leave from the month prior to treatment to twelve months
after treatment. The positive long-term effects provide validation for
the NNBT as an efficient treatment of stress-related illnesses.

# 3. Results

Of the 83 participants allocated between the two treatments, 41
participants completed the NBT treatment and 40 participants completed
the CBT treatment (see [Figure 1](#)). Four participants in the NBT were
lost to follow-up because the correct personal identification number was
not provided. Five participants were lost to follow-up in the CBT; four
participants did not provide the correct personal identification number;
and, one participant withdrew consent after the treatment.

The results from the background questionnaire showed that the vast
majority of participants were women (NBT: 82%, CBT: 82%) with a mean age
of 47.9 in NBT and 44.9 in CBT \[[11](#)\]. The majority had a
university bachelor degree or higher education (NBT: 76%, CBT: 68%). The
categorization of participants with respect to socioeconomic status
showed an even distribution between the two treatments; the majority of
participants in both NBT and CBT were employed at the start of treatment
(NBT = 20; CBT = 21), and a great number held a top-level position (NBT
= 13; CBT = 12) ([Table 1](#)). A substantial proportion of participants
were also registered as unemployed at treatment start (NBT = 18; CBT =
18). Of those, 17 participants from the NBT and 16 participants from the
CBT were fired from work during the twelve months preceding the start of
treatment. Moreover, one participant in the NBT and two participants in
the CBT quit their job during that period.

## 3.1. Sick Leave

All of the participants were rated as incapacitated for work for at
least three months prior to treatment start, as stated in the inclusion
criteria, but not all participants were registered as being on sick
leave in Statistics Denmark prior to treatment start ([Figure 2](#)).
They were, instead, registered as receiving other rehabilitation
benefits or as students.

The sample distributions, representing the number of months of sick
leave, expressed significant deviations from the normal distribution
(*p* \< 0.05). Efforts to establish normal distributions using various
types of statistical transformations were unsuccessful.

No significant change was found in the total number of months of sick
leave for the participants in the period from twelve months before the
treatment compared to the twelve months after the treatment for either
the NBT or the CBT treatments (*p* \> 0.05). [Figure 2](#) illustrates
the continous increase in the number of participants on sick-leave in
the twelve months up to the start of treatment and, similarly, the
similar decrease in the number of participants on sick leave from the
end of the treatment to twelve months after.

A significant decrease was found between the participants on sick leave
one month prior to treatment and in month twelve after treatment (NBT:
*p* \< 0.001; CBT: *p* \< 0.01), ([Table 2](#)).

23 participants (77%) who were on sick leave prior to treatment and
received the NBT treatment were not on sick leave twelve months after
completing the treatment ([Table 2](#)). 15 participants (60%) who were
on sick leave prior to treatment start and received the CBT treatment
were not on sick leave twelve months after completing the treatment
([Table 2](#)). In total, 27 participants from the NBT group and 20
participants from the CBT group were not on sick leave after completing
the treatment.

## 3.2. Healthcare Consumption

For the NBT and the CBT, there was a significant reduction in number of
contacts with a GP twelve months after treatment as compared to the
twelve months before treatment (NBT *p* ˂ 0.01; CBT *p* ˂ 0.05) ([Table
3](#)). The sizes of the effect were r = −0.396 (NBT) and r = −0.249
(CBT).

In terms of the number of contacts, the median number of contacts with a
GP is still much higher for the participants one year after the
treatment for both the NBT and the CBT groups when compared to the adult
population of Denmark as a whole (mean number of contacts = 5.95)
\[[24](#)\]. (Because the sample did not show a normal distribution, it
was decided to use the median value instead of the mean value, which is
used in the national sample. Nevertheless, the two statistical measures
are still comparable in terms of understanding the central tendency of
the statistical scores).

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>Participant flow diagram.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<p><img src="" /></p>
<figcaption>The proportion of participants on sick leave from twelve
months prior to twelve months after a treatment. (NBT: <em>n</em> = 34;
CBT: <em>n</em> = 30). Note 1. The gap in the graph represents the
treatment period; Note 2. Data from the register: AMRUN; variable;
SOC_STATUS_KODE was not available for 2016; therefore, data on three
participants in NBT and five participants in CBT are
missing.</figcaption>
</figure>

:::: table-wrap
ijerph-15-00137-t001_Table 1

::: caption
Socioeconomic classification of participants.
:::

  Socioeconomic Classification               NBT (*n* = 37)   CBT (*n* = 35)
  ------------------------------------------ ---------------- ----------------
  Employee---ground level                    2                5
  Employee---intermediate level              3                3
  Employee---top level                       13               12
  Chief executive                            1                0
  Self-employed                              1                1
  Unemployed                                 18               18
  Student                                    2                3
  Other compensation services/job training   3                0

Note 1. Classification based on the register: AMRUN; variable;
SOC_STATUS_KODE; Note 2. Some participants were registered under several
codes in the AMRUN register at treatment start (NBT = 6 participants,
CBT = 7 participants).
::::

:::: table-wrap
ijerph-15-00137-t002_Table 2

::: caption
Participants' sick-leave status from the month prior to treatment
compared to twelve months after the treatment (NBT: *n* = 34; CBT: *n* =
30).
:::

  Treatments          Point in Time                     Sick-Leave Status   Month 12 after the Treatment   
  ------------------- --------------------------------- ------------------- ------------------------------ ---
  Not on Sick Leave   On Sick Leave                                                                        
  NBT (*n* = 34)      1 month before the treatment \*   Not on sick leave   4                              0
  On sick leave       23                                7                                                  
  CBT (*n* = 30)      1 month before the treatment \*   Not on sick leave   5                              1
  On sick leave       15                                9                                                  

\* As the AMRUN register data is only available on a monthly basis, the
starting point for the analysis was decided to be the month prior to the
date of the treatment start; Note 2. Data from the register: AMRUN;
variable; SOC_STATUS_KODE was not available for 2016; therefore, data on
three participants in NBT and five participants in CBT are missing.
::::

:::: table-wrap
ijerph-15-00137-t003_Table 3

::: caption
Number of contacts with a general practitioner from twelve months before
treatment to twelve months after treatment (NBT: *n* = 37; CBT: *n* =
35).
:::

  Treatment        Point in Time   Median   Max.   Min.   Sign.
  ---------------- --------------- -------- ------ ------ ----------------------
  NBT (*n* = 37)   Before          18       42     1      *p* = 0.001 **\*\***
  After            13              67       0             
  CBT (*n* = 35)   Before          21       103    6      *p* = 0.04 **\***
  After            14              35       5             

\* *p* \< 0.05; \*\* *p* \< 0.01.
::::
